ty*ciftam«U***iflpo 


LIFE    IN   INDIA. 





ftV 


MAJOR  THE  HON.  C.  DUTTON, 


LONJJONi 
W.  H.  ALLEN  &  CO.,  13  WATERLOO  PLACE, 

PALL   MALL.     S.W. 


1882. 

All  rights  reserved 


LONDON  : 
PRINTED  BY  W.  H.  ALLEN  AND  CO.,  13,  WATERLOO  PLACE,  *.W. 





CONSIDERING  what  an  important  part  of  the 
British  Empire  India  is,  and  how  many  of  the 
British  not  only  visit  it  but  depend  on  it  for  a 
livelihood,  it  is  wonderful  how  little  is  known  in 
England  about  the  country,  and  how  unprepared 
those  going  out  generally  are  for  what  they  may 
find  there. 

The  two  principal  classes  of  Europeans  in  India 
are  the  soldiers,  who  really  hold  the  country,  and 
the  members  of  the  civil  service,  who  attend  to 
the  collection  of  revenue,  administration  of  jus- 
tice, and  the  general  working  of  the  laws. 
Besides  these,  there  are  the  mercantile  classes 
which  are  mostly  to  be  found  in  the  presidency 

1 


2  

towns  of  Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bombay,  and 
the  planters,  who  cultivate  indigo,  tea,  coffee, 
&c.,  and  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  latter 
class  is  increasing  yearly. 

Life  in  India  has  changed  very  much  within 
the  last  forty  or  fifty  years,  chiefly  owing  to  the 
greater  ease  and  rapidity  with  which  visits  can 
now  be  made  to  Europe.  In  former  days,  men 
who  joined  the  Indian  army  or  civil  service  did 
so  knowing  that  India  would  be  their  home  for 
the  greater  part  of  their  lives,  and  that  until 
they  finally  quitted  the  country  their  visits  to 
Europe  would  be  few  and  far  between.  They 
consequently  laid  themselves  out  for  life  in  their 
new  homes,  spent  their  money  there,  and  dis- 
pensed the  hospitality  for  which  India  has  always 
been  famous.  But  there  is  a  great  change  in 
this  respect  now-a-days.  The  facilities  for 
getting  to  Europe  are  much  greater,  and  short 
periods  of  furlough  are  more  easily  obtainable 
than  they  were  formerly;  consequently  the  chief 
thought  with  European  officers  is  to  live  carefully 


 3 

in  India,  and  save  up  all  their  pay  to  be  spent  on 
visits  to  England.  Officers  frequently  go  home 
now  on  three  months'  leave,  which,  deducting 
the  time  spent  on  the  passage  home  and  out 
again,  gives  about  six  weeks  in  England.  Sup- 
posing such  visits  are  made  every  three  years, 
with  now  and  then  longer  ones,  extending  to 
one  or  perhaps  two  years,  it  is  obvious  that  when 
they  are  provided  for,  much  money  will  not 
remain  to  be  spent  in  India. 

There  is  another  thing  which  has  constituted 
a  serious  loss  of  late  years  to  Europeans  living 
in  India,  and  that  is  the  loss  in  remitting 
money  to  England.  The  rupee  is  supposed  to  be 
worth  two  shillings,  and  in  size  and  make  is 
very  much  like  a  florin.  Till  about  thirteen  years 
ago,  this  could  be  remitted  to  England  at  the 
equivalent  of  two  shillings,  or  very  nearly  that, 
but  for  some  time  past,  owing  to  depreciation  in 
the  value  of  silver,  the  rupee  has  not  been  worth 
quite  one  shilling  and  eight  pence,  and  the  con- 
sequence is  that  a  person  wishing  to  send,  say 

1  * 


4  

one  hundred  pounds  to  England,  has  to  pay 
rather  over  twelve  hundred  rupees,  or  20  per 
cent,  to  do  so.  Considering  how  many  Indian 
officials  there  are  who  have  children  to  be 
brought  up  in  England  and  other  expenses 
there,  it  can  be  easily  understood  that  this  loss 
by  exchange  is  a  very  serious  matter  ;  for  sala- 
ries have  not  increased  in  India — rather  the 
reverse,  if  anything — while  expenses,  as  in  all 
countries  with  which  the  English  have  to  do, 
have  very  decidedly  increased — almost  doubled 
within  the  last  fifty  years,  some  people  say. 

That  branch  of  the  army  which  belongs  to  the 
Queen's  service,  as  it  is  called  in  contradistinc- 
tion to  the  Indian  service,  mostly  travels  back- 
wards and  forwards  between  Great  Britain  and 
India  in  H.M.'s  Indian  troopships,  .than  which 
it  would  be  hard  to  find  a  finer  mode  of  convey- 
ance ;  in  fact,  I  believe  these  troopships  are  the 
finest  of  their  sort  in  the  world.  Officers  of  the 
Queen's  service  coming  to  England  on  leave  on 
private  affairs,  officers  of  the  Indian  military 


 5 

service,  and  officers  of  the  Indian  Civil  Service, 
have  to  provide  themselves  with  passages,  and 
usually  employ  the  ships  of  the  Peninsular  and 
Oriental  Company.  These  also  are  very  fine 
ships,  and  if  speed  is  an  object,  the  plan  is  to  go 
by  Venice  or  Brindisi,  and  thence  across  the 
Isthmus  of  Suez  by  the  Canal.  By  this  route, 
Bombay  can  be  reached  from  London  in  nine- 
teen or  twenty  days.  Some  people  though,  who 
have  families  or  who  wish  to  avoid  all  the 
changes  inseparable  from  using  this  route,  or 
who  may  be  good  sailors  and  not  averse  to  a  sea 
voyage,  prefer  taking  ship  at  Gravesend,  and 
they  will  then  be  about  twenty-eight  days  in 
getting  to  Bombay. 

The  P.  and  0.  ships,  as  they  are  usually 
called  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  travel  at  a  higher 
rate  of  speed  than  the  troopships,  but  they  stop 
at  Gibraltar,  Malta,  Port  Said,  Suez,  and  Aden, 
while  the  troopships,  as  a  rule,  stop  only  at 
Malta  and  Port  Said.  There  are  other  ships 
running  between  England  and  India  also  which 


0  

convey  a  considerable  number  of  passengers,  and 
they  ply  from  London,  Southampton,  and  Liver- 
pool to  Bombay,  Madras,  and  Calcutta ;  but  the 
P.  and  0.  certainly  carries  the  largest  number  of 
passengers ;  firstly,  because  it  is  the  oldest  esta- 
blished company,  possessing  a  large  fleet  of  very 
fine  ships,  and  it  has  been  for  years  noted  for 
having  very  efficient  officers  and  crews ;  and, 
secondly,  because,  as  the  Company  has  a  con- 
tract with  Government  for  the  carriage  of  the 
mails,  the  journey  has  to  be  performed  within  a 
certain  time,  and  passengers  feel  sure  of  being 
landed  at  Bombay  by  the  date  on  which  they 
have  calculated.  Personally,  I  have  only  been 
to  and  from  India  in  one  of  H.M.'s  troopships, 
so  I  know  nothing  of  the  quicker  route  across 
Europe  and  by  Brindisi.  The  first  place  we 
stopped  at  was  Malta,  and  I  must  say  I  should 
not  care  to  remain  there  any  length  of  time. 
There  is  plenty  to  interest  and  amuse  one  for  a 
few  days,  but  there  must  be  a  great  sameness 
about  life  in  Malta,  and  the  people  who  get  on 


 ( 

best  there  are  those  who  are  fond  of  yachting, 
for  which  it  does  very  well. 

The  old  Roman  Catholic  churches  in  the  chief 
town,  Yaletta,  are  most  interesting,  with  their 
pictures  and  monuments,  and  there  are  beautiful 
orange  gardens  in  the  interior  of  the  island 
which  are  well  worth  a  visit.  In  Valetta  there 
is  a  very  fine  Opera  House,  where  there  is  a 
good  opera  every  winter,  which  can  be  attended 
for  prices  that  seem  very  moderate  when  com- 
pared with  London  ones  ;  and  there  is  an  excel- 
lent club  for  those  who  reside  in  the  island,  and 
to  which  visitors  can  obtain  access  if  they  have 
friends  who  are  members  of  it.  In  fact,  when 
you  leave  Malta  you  part  company  with  Euro- 
pean life,  and  your  next  experiences  will  be  of 
the  East. 

The  next  place  at  which  the  ship  stops  is 
Port  Said,  a  small  town  at  the  Mediterranean 
mouth  of  the  Suez  Canal,  and  here  coal  is  taken 
in.  There  is  nothing  of  any  interest  to  be  seen 
here.  The  place  has  only  sprung  up  since  the 


8  

opening  of  the  canal,  and  though  it  has  increased 
very  much  lately,  and  will  probably  increase  still 
more,  the  only  thing  to  take  one  ashore  is  to 
make  purchases  of  fruit  or  other  things  one  may 
happen  to  want,  or  to  inquire  for  letters  which 
are  sometimes  sent  to  the  post-office  there  to 
await  arrival.  Coaling  over,  the  ship  proceeds 
through  the  canal,  and  while  doing  so,  it  is 
impossible  to  help  feeling  that  one  sees  a  very 
wonderful  piece  of  engineering.  Ships  propel 
themselves  through  the  canal,  going  at  a  slow 
rate,  and  time  has  shown  that  the  banks  wear 
far  better  even  than  the  promoters  of  the  scheme 
anticipated.  There  is,  of  course,  a  considerable 
amount  of  traffic  through  it,  and  ships  con- 
tinually pass  each  other,  one  lying  in  a  bay  cut 
out  of  the  bank  while  the  other  passes.  About 
the  middle  there  are  some  natural  lakes  called 
the  ''Bitter  Lakes,"  and  ships  often  anchor  in  one 
of  these  for  the  night,  as  they  all  have  to  spend 
a  night  somewhere  in  getting  through  the  canal. 
There  is  nothing  of  any  interest  or  beauty 


 V 

to  be  seen  in  passing  it,  little  but  sandy  desert 
on  either  side ;  but  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  avoid 
the  change  from  ship  to  train  and  then  back 
again  to  ship,  which  had  to  be  made  before 
the  canal  was  opened,  especially  as  in  doing 
so  one  had  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  fresh 
officers,  and  commence  everything  de  now. 

Suez,  which  is  at  the  other  end  of  the  canal, 
is  uninteresting  too,  but  it  is  soon  left  behind 
and  one  is  steaming  away  down  the  Bed  Sea, 
the  most  noticeable  feature  of  which  is  its  exces- 
sive heat,  which  is  present  for  the  greater  part 
of  the  year.  Some  people  do,  and  some  do 
not,  know  what  clothing  they  should  take  with 
them  for  wear  on  the  voyage ;  and  though  it 
depends  very  much  on  the  season  of  the  year, 
still  it  is  necessary  to  have  clothes  of  different 
thickness  for  different  parts  of  the  voyage,  no 
matter  when  the  journey  is  made.  For  securing 
a  favourable  temperature  throughout,  the  best 
time  to  go  is  in  the  very  depth  of  winter ;  for 
if  you  go  by  Brindisi,  you  soon  get  from  the 


10  

cold  of  England  to  the  warmth  of  the  Medi- 
terranean, and  the  heat  from  Suez  to  Bombay 
will  never  be  disagreeable.  Should  you  go  at 
this  time  by  Gibraltar  and  Malta,  the  journey 
will  be  very  cold  till  the  Mediterranean  is 
entered,  and  up  to  that  point  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  have  plenty  of  warm  clothes  which 
can  be  gradually  laid  aside  till  Suez  is  reached, 
when  a  complete  change  of  costume  will  be 
necessary.  Perhaps  the  hottest  portion  of  the 
whole  journey  is  the  Red  Sea,  and  there  are 
only  four  months  in  the  whole  year,  viz.  January  ^ 
February,  November,  and  December,  when  this 
can  be  called  at  all  cool.  It  is  hot,  but  very 
bearable,  in  June,  July,  and  August,  while  the 
monsoon  is  blowing,  but  at  other  times  of  the 
year  it  is  suffocating. 

Travellers  who  have  nothing  to  do  with  India, 
but  who  simply  go  out  there  during  the  winter 
to  see  the  country  or  get  sport,  generally  leave 
England  about  the  end  of  September  or  begin- 
ning of  October,  and  start  on  their  homeward 


 11 

journey  again  towards  the  end  of  March,  that 
is  to  say  before  the  hot  weather  sets  in.  These 
are  the  men  who  never  can  understand  what 
Englishmen  have  to  complain  of  in  India,  and 
think  they  are  very  much  overpaid.  They  forget 
the  years  that  are  spent  in  exile  away  from 
home  and  away  from  friends,  and  they  know 
nothing  of  the  days  that  are  spent  shut  up  in 
a  house,  with  the  thermometer  ranging  from  90° 
to  about  105°,  or  of  the  nights  when  the  unhappy 
Englishman  tosses  about  with  not  even  a  sheet 
over  him,  and  totally  unable  to  sleep  for  the 
heat.  Indian  officers,  too,  very  often  go  to 
England  at  the  commencement  of  the  hot  season 
and  return  when  the  cold  is  setting  in,  for  by 
this  means,  if  they  take  eighteen  months  fur- 
lough, they  secure  two  summers  in  England 
which  is  a  great  object,  as  the  winters  in  India 
are  enjoyable  enough. 

No  matter  when  you  go,  though,  you  should 
have  changes  from  under-clothing  upwards  ready 
for  wear  at  Suez,  and  the  best  plan  is  to  have 


12  

these  packed  in  a  separate  portmanteau  and 
lodged  in  the  baggage-room  to  he  got  up  while 
passing  through  the  canal. 

There  is  no  douht  that  a  journey  to  India 
presents  fine  opportunities  to  anyone  who  wants 
leisure  for  reading  and  writing,  for  it  is  not 
an  easy  matter  to  get  through  the  long  days 
on  board  ship.  Most  people  naturally  take 
books  with  them,  but  on  H.M.'s  troop-ships, 
and,  I  believe,  on  the  P.  and  0.  ships  as  well, 
there  are  very  good  libraries,  which,  if  not  filled 
with  the  newest  books,  at  any  rate  contain  a 
good  many  one  has  never  read,  and  a  good 
many  of  histories,  travels,  and  biographies, 
which  are  always  interesting,  no  matter  when 
they  are  read. 

There  is  one  way  in  which  some  of  the 
travellers  to  India  pass  away  the  time  on  board 
ship,  and  a  very  useful  way  it  is  too,  and  that 
is  by  learning  something  of  the  Hindustani 
language.  It  is,  I  suppose,  one  of  the  most 
easy  in  the  world  to  learn,  both  as  regards 


 IB 

grammar  and  pronunciation,  and,  armed  with  Dr. 
Forbes's  Hindustani  Manual  and  his  dictionary, 
it  is  wonderful  how  much  colloquial  knowledge 
you  may  attain  in  the  month  passed  between 
Gravesend  and  Bombay. 

Besides  its  heat,  the  other  point  most  notice- 
able about  the  Red  Sea  is  the  intricacy  of  its 
navigation,  at  any  rate  as  compared  with  the 
other  portions  of  the  voyage,  and  more  wrecks 
occur  in  it  than  anywhere  else  on  the  whole 
journey.  The  Southern  Cross  here  first  becomes 
visible,  but  seen  so  far  north  it  is  a  very  poor 
constellation,  and  rather  disappointing  to  those 
who  expect  to  find  in  it  a  rival  to  the  Great 
Bear  and  other  of  the  northern  constellations. 
To  be  viewed  at  its  best  it  should  be  seen 
much  further  south,  south  of  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  in  fact,  but  it  is  never  so  distinct  and 
marked  as  the  Great  Bear.  At  the  entrance 
to  the  Red  Sea  from  the  Indian  Ocean  is  the 
Island  of  Perim,  which  is  held  by  a  detachment 
of  native  infantry,  relieved  every  three  months 


14  

from  Aden.  A.  more  dreary  abode  for  the 
British  officer  in  command  of  the  detachment 
it  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive,  as  he  is  the 
only  European  on  the  island,  and  consequently 
entirely  without  society. 

There  is  an  old  story  told  in  India  on  this 
subject  to  the  following  effect,  but  I  should  be 
very  sorry  to  vouch  for  its  accuracy.  Formerly 
the  detachments  at  Perim  were  only  relieved 
every  six  months,  and  some  years  ago  a 
subaltern  was  stationed  on  the  island  who, 
when  the  time  for  his  relief  was  approaching, 
applied  for  permission  to  remain  with  the  new 
detachment.  The  general  who  had  to  sanction 
the  arrangement  was  somewhat  astonished  at 
the  application,  but  thinking  that  the  officer 
was  perhaps  of  a  studious  turn  of  mind  and 
anxious  for  an  opportunity  of  reading  without 
disturbance,  or  possibly  wished  to  remain  there 
for  financial  reasons,  consented  without  demur. 
He  was  still  more  astonished  when  at  the  end 
of  the  year  the  same  officer  applied  for  per- 


 16 

mission  to  remain  on  in  the  island,  but  still 
he  raised  no  objections  to  the  arrangement. 
In  the  meantime  the  General  went  to  England 
on  leave,  and  one  morning  when  walking  down 
Pall  Mall,  the  first  person  he  met  was  the 
subaltern  whom  he  had  supposed  to  be  safe 
in  the  island  of  Perim !  The  secret  was  out, 
and  the  General  no  longer  wondered  at  his 
young  friend's  apparent  love  of  solitude. 

After  leaving  the  Red  Sea,  it  does  not  take 
long  to  reach  Aden,  and  though  troopships 
do  not  often  stop  there,  the  P.  and  0.  steamers 
always  do.  It  is  a  dreary  place  and  by  no 
means  popular  as  a  station ;  a  fact  of  which 
the  Government  of  India  show  their  appreciation 
by  relieving  the  British  infantry  regiment  there 
every  year. 

Aden  suffers  from  a  very  scanty  water-supply, 
and  about  three  or  four  miles  inland,  situated 
amongst  low  rocky  hills,  are  some  large  and 
curiously  constructed  reservoirs  which  serve  to 
catch  whatever  rainfall  there  is,  and  on  which 


16  

the  cantonments  are  principally  dependent  for 
their  water.  These  are  really  the  only  things 
at  Aden  worth  seeing,  and  most  people,  I  fancy, 
are  glad  when  the  ship  steams  away,  whether 
it  be  towards  England  or  India.  In  the  latter 
case  land  is  not  again  sighted  until  Bombay 
is  reached,  and  here  commences  the  traveller's 
first  experience  of  Indian  life. 

He  will  soon  find  himself  besieged  by  servants 
wanting  employment,  and  these  will  be  of  differ- 
ent races.  Of  course  if  he  is  remaining  in 
the  Bombay  Presidency,  there  will  be  swarms 
willing  to  take  service  with  him,  as  this  is 
their  home ;  if  he  is  going  to  Madras,  he  may 
find  a  few  Madrassees  anxious  to  return  to 
their  own  country,  or  some  Bombay  men 
may  be  willing  to  go  with  him  ;  but  if  he  is 
going  to  the  Bengal  Presidency,  he  will  find 
a  considerable  number  of  servants  who  have 
come  down  to  Bombay  with  masters  who  are 
leaving  India,  and  especially  if  they  have  not 
had  their  return  fares  paid  they  are  anxious 


LIFE   IN    INDIA.  17 

to  get  service  with  someone  who  will  give  them 
free  passage  up  country  again.  I  have  heard 
it  said  that  such  servants  should  never  be  em- 
ployed, but  I  cannot  say  that  I  see  any  reason 
for  this.  You  may,  of  course,  pick  up  a  bad 
one,  but  so  you  may  anywhere ;  while  on  the 
other  hand,  if  a  master  takes  but  one  servant 
down  to  Bombay  to  wait  on  him  until  he  goes 
on  board  ship,  it  is  only  likely  that  he  would  take 
the  best  he  has,  and  if  there  be  any  truth 
in  this,  the  person  arriving  in  Bombay  from. 
England  ought  to  have  a  choice  of  rather  good 
servants  than  otherwise.  At  any  rate  I  have 
known  several  cases  of  servants  engaged  at 
Bombay  remaining  with  their  masters  for  years 
after ;  and  even  if  they  do  not  suit,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  changing  them,  for  this  is  much 
more  easily  managed  in  India  than  in  England. 

Legally,  I  believe,  servants  out  there  can 
claim  a  fortnight's  warning,  but  practically  this 
is  never  given  ;  and  if  a  servant  does  not  answer, 
it  is  much  better  both  for  him  and  his  master 


18  

that  he  should  be  changed  as  soon  as  possible. 
If  it  did  not  suit  the  servants  they  would 
very  soon  apply  to  the  magistrates,  for  they 
rarely  hesitate  to  take  out  summonses  against 
employers  by  whom  they  consider  themselves 
ill-treated. 

In  India  the  system  is  not  as  in  England, 
to  write  to  a  servant's  former  employer  and 
ask  for  a  character  of  him,  but  on  dismissal 
each  servant,  if  fit  to  have  a  character  at  all, 
receives  one  written  on  a  sheet  of  paper — a 
chit,  as  it  is  called  in  the  language  of  the 
country.  In  this  matter  I  fear  there  is  a 
feeling,  which  obtains  also  in  England  very 
much,  of  smoothing  away  defects,  and  saying 
as  little  as  possible  to  a  servant's  disadvan- 
tage. Even  when  a  servant  has  been  a  very 
bad  one  you  will  too  often  find  the  master 
saying,  "  Oh,  poor  wretch,  I  won't  say  any- 
thing to  prevent  his  getting  another  place," 
and  so  makes  the  most  of  any  virtues  he  may 
have  had,  but  carefully  avoids  saying  anything 


 19 

of  his  failings.  As  soon  as  the  chit  is  given, 
the  recipient  goes  off  to  someone  in  the  bazaar 
who  can  read  English,  and  asks  him  what 
his  master  has  said.  If  the  character  is  not 
as  favourable  as  he  wishes,  back  he  goes  and 
commences  whining  about  the  damage  his  late 
master  is  doing  by  giving  him  so  bad  a  one. 
"  Is  he  (the  master)  not  his  father  and  mother  ? 
Does  he  wish  to  starve  his  children  ? "  &c. ; 
and  he  goes  on  in  this  way  till  the  master, 
worried  out  of  all  patience,  very  likely  tears 
up  the  character,  and  gives  another  not  penned 
so  strictly  according  to  truth  as  the  first,  but 
more  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the 
recipient. 

A  servant  at  all  advanced  in  years  will  pro- 
bably produce  a  considerable  bundle  of  these 
characters,  and  they  may  all  be  genuine  and 
the  property  of  a  very  good  servant,  or  not. 
In  the  first  place  they  are  considered  of  so 
much  value  that  they  are  frequently  stolen  and 
sold  for  (what  are  to  people  in  that  class  of 

2  * 


20  

life)  considerable  sums  of  money.  Then  they 
are  bequeathed  by  one  relation  to  another,  and 
they  are  occasionally  lent  for  a  consideration, 
until  the  borrower  is  suited  with  a  situation ; 
and  in  all  of  these  cases  the  name  given  in  the 
characters  has  to  be  assumed  by  the  person 
using  them,  so  though  masters  employing  ser- 
vants always  ask  them  their  names,  they  very 
rarely  have  the  wrong  ones  given  them. 

It  is  a  good  plan  when  engaging  a  servant, 
unless  he  has  been  handed  over  to  you  by  a 
friend  who  knows  all  about  him, "to  keep  these 
characters,  enclosing  them  all  in  an  envelope 
inscribed  with  the  owner's  name,  and  putting 
them  away,  at  any  rate  for  some  time,  till  you 
see  what  sort  of  a  bargain  you  have  got.  If 
the  owner  objects  to  your  keeping  his  characters, 
you  may  be  pretty  certain  that  they  do  not 
belong  to  him,  and  you  had  better  have  nothing 
to  do  with  him ;  but  if  he  is  willing  to  leave 
them  in  your  hands  it  is  easy  to  keep  them 
for  a  time,  and  if  the  man  turns  out  well  and 


LIFE    IN   INDIA.  21 

you  do  not  want  to  be  troubled  with  his  cha- 
racters, you  can  always  return  them  to  him. 

Most  people  would  be  inclined  to  engage, 
at  any  rate,  one  servant  at  Bombay,  and  espe- 
cially if  going  up  country  with  troops,  as  in 
this  case  several  days  would  be  spent  on  the 
journey,  and  the  best  man  to  get  would  be 
one  who  would  do  valet  and  wait  at  table  also. 
I  might  as  well  say  here  that  no  one  must 
expect  to  find  an  Indian  servant  like  a  really 
good  English  valet.  They  have  no  idea  of 
packing  whatever,  and  simply  cram  clothes  and 
other  articles  into  portmanteaux  anyhow.  Then 
they  know  nothing  of  cleaning  boots,  breeches, 
&c.,  as  an  English  servant  would  do,  and 
altogether  are  not  to  be  compared  to  the  latter. 
It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  have  them  though, 
for,  supposing  people  could  afford  the  expense 
of  European  servants,  they  are  not  suited  to 
the  country,  and  this  is  clearly  shown  by  the 
fact  that  even  officers  in  the  army  give  up 
their  soldier  servants,  and  when  they  do  keep 


22  

them   on,  only  employ  them   to    clean   swords, 
gloves,  guns,  &c. 

Ayahs  who  perform  the  duties  of  nurses  or 
of  ladies'  maids  are,  if  anything,  still  more 
inferior.  Not  one  in  five  hundred  knows  any- 
thing about  doing  hair ;  and  as  for  dressmaking  or 
even  mending,  of  this  they  are  equally  ignorant. 
However,  they  are  useful  in  different  ways,  and 
if  a  lady  landing  at  Bombay  has  any  children 
with  her  she  will  find  it  almost  essential  to  get  an 
ayah  before  starting  on  her  journey  "  up  country." 
There  is  no  doubt  that  Madras  ayahs  are  very 
much  the  best  in  India,  and  though  they  require 
better  wages  than  Bengali  ones,  they  are,  if 
good,  well  worth  the  money.  For  one  thing, 
they  speak  English  really  well  and  fluently, 
which  is  a  great  convenience  to  a  lady  arriving 
in  India  for  the  first  time,  and  they  are  much 
more  like  English  servants  in  all  their  ways 
than  the  ordinary  ayahs  are ;  the  only  thing  is 
that  like  Madras  men-servants  they  are  very  diffi- 
cult to  get  good  out  of  their  own  country.  How- 


 23 

ever,  whatever  native  servants  she  may  employ, 
I  would  recommend  every  English  lady  who  has 
children,  and  can  at  all  afford  it,  to  take  out  an 
English  nurse  with  her.  Hitherto,  it  has  occa- 
sionally been  possible  to  obtain  fairly  good 
nurses  from  amongst  the  soldiers'  wives  in 
India,  but  it  is  never  possible  to  reckon  on  their 
staying  for  any  length  of  time,  and,  moreover,  it 
must  be  remembered  that,  under  the  new  army 
organisation,  there  will  not  be  many  married 
people  to  choose  from. 

Having  said  so  much  on  this  subject,  I  would 
devote  a  few  words  to  Bombay  before  carrying 
my  readers  away  to  the  interior.  In  my  opinion 
this  is  the  finest  of  all  the  presidency  towns  ;  for 
though  Calcutta  is  the  head -quarters  of  the 
Government  of  India,  and  is  called  the  City  of 
Palaces,  I  never  could  see  much  of  the  palace 
description  about  it,  with  the  exception  of 
Government  House,  which  undoubtedly  is  a  very 
fine  building.  Otherwise,  Bombay  has  far  finer 
buildings  than  anything  I  ever  saw  in  Calcutta, 


24  

and  it  has,  besides,  the  advantage  of  being  most 
beautifully  situated  on  the  sea,  while  Calcutta  is 
built  on  the  banks  of  the  Hooghly,  which  is  any- 
thing but  a  pure  river,  and  some  miles  from  the 
Bay  of  Bengal.  Running  out  from  Bombay  into 
the  sea,  is  a  sort  of  spur  called  Malabar  Hill, 
which  affords  a  very  fine  situation  for  houses, 
with  which  it  is  covered,  the  Governor  amongst 
others  having  one  there. 

There  are  several  different  hotels  in  Bombay, 
the  largest  being  Watson's,  which  is  somewhat 
on  the  principle  of  the  Langham  and  other 
large  London  hotels.  I  have  heard  all  of  these 
establishments  more  or  less  abused,  but  I  will 
leave  any  of  my  readers,  who  may  ever  visit 
India,  to  form  their  opinions  for  themselves. 
The  shops  in  Bombay  are  good  enough,  in  fact 
better  than  anything  that  will  be  found  in  the 
country  except  in  Calcutta  or  Madras,  for  the 
smaller  stations  can  compete  in  this  respect  with 
the  presidency  towns  even  less  than  country 
towns  in  England  can  compete  with  London. 


 25 

One  great  requirement  of  Bombay  at  present 
is  a  new  cathedral,  for  in  this  respect  it  is  not 
nearly  so  well  off  as  Calcutta  or  Madras,  and,  in 
fact,  has  to  put  up  with  a  very  ordinary  church, 
not  nearly  so  good  as  those  to  be  seen  in  many 
stations  in  India,  which  is  dignified  with  the 
name  of  The  Cathedral.  The  service  is  very  well 
conducted  there  though,  and  in  the  matter  of 
singing  it  is  ahead  of  any  other  church  I  ever 
was  in  in  India. 

There  is  one  thing  which  everyone  before 
leaving  Bombay  must  furnish  himself  with,  and 
that  is  bedding;  for  it  is  one  of  the  peculiari- 
ties of  the  country,  that  wherever  you  travel 
you  take  your  bedding  with  you.  Bed-linen 
you  will  probably  have  brought  out  from 
England,  and  possibly  blankets  also,  but  the 
remainder  you  will  have  to  get  in  Bombay. 
Wherever  you  go  you  will  find  in  your  room 
a  bedstead,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  country, 
charpoy,  which  is  simply  a  wooden  frame  covered 
with  cotton  webbing,  and  very  comfortable  bed- 


26  

steads  they  are.  In  most  bazaars,  and  certainly 
in  a  large  town  like  Bombay,  there  is  no  diffi- 
culty in  getting  resnis,  which  are  quilts  made  of 
some  bright-coloured  and  generally  rather  flashy- 
patterned  chintz,  thickly  lined  with  cotton  wool. 
Some  people  in  India  use  mattresses,  but  resais 
are  more  convenient  when  travelling,  and  it  is 
the  custom  to  spread  out  one  of  these  to  lie  upon ; 
possibly,  if  the  weather  is  cold  enough,  using 
another  as  a  covering  over  the  top  sheet,  unless 
blankets  are  used,  which  I  think  preferable. 
However,  having  bought  one  or  two  of  these 
resais  and  a  pillow,  the  traveller  is  fitted  out  with 
his  bedding,  if  he  possesses  linen,  and  he  will 
then  only  require  a  waterproof  sheet,  and  a 
couple  of  straps  to  roll  it  up  with  when  it  is  not 
spread  out.  It  is  just  as  well  to  take  all  such 
things  out  from  England,  ready  for  use,  as  they 
cost  double  the  price  if  bought  in  India. 

The  principal  reason  for  this  taking  bedding 
about  is  that  it  is  so  frequently  wanted  in  rail- 
way journeys  or  journeys  by  road,  which  often 


 27 

extend  over  several  nights,  and  this  was  much 
more  the  case  in  former  days  than  now.  When 
travelling  by  train  in  India,  either  first  or  second 
class,  every  person  is  entitled  to  as  much  space 
as  will  enable  him  to  lie  down  at  full  length,  and 
with  this  view  the  carriages  are  made  on  an 
entirely  different  pattern  to  those  in  England. 
Every  European  traveller  going  first  or  second 
class,  and  those  of  the  higher  ranks  amongst 
the  natives,  have  their  bedding  with  them,  and 
when  evening  approaches  make  regular  prepara- 
tions for  turning  in. 

In  former  days,  very  long  journeys  had  to  be 
made  by  dooly  dak,  the  meaning  of  the  former 
word  being  the  conveyance  in  which  the  pas- 
senger travelled,  a  sort  of  oblong  box  or 
framework,  with  curtains,  long  enough  to  lie 
down  in,  suspended  by  iron  rings  from  a  long 
pole.  This  was  carried  by  four  men  at  a  time, 
six  or  eight  men  accompanying  the  dooly  at  once 
and  being  relieved  every  four  or  five  miles,  with 
spare  men  for  the  luggage,  whence  the  word  daky 


28  

which  means  stage  or  staging.  This  mode  of 
conveyance  is  still  in  use  over  some  roads  in 
India,  though  it  has  been  a  good  deal  superseded 
by  carriage  daks.  In  the  beginning  of  the  cen- 
tury, journeys  in  India  took  an  enormous  time ; 
for  even  in  going  up  country,  people  had  to  go 
the  whole  way  by  dooly  dak,  and  you  cannot 
reckon  on  more  than  four  miles  an  hour  by  this 
mode  of  conveyance. 

A  story  is  told  of  Bishop  Wilson  (who  was 
Bishop  of  Calcutta,  and  who  in  this  respect 
really  seems  to  have  been  the  Bishop  Wilberforce 
of  India,  for  all  sorts  of  stories  are  told  about 
him),  that  once  a  young  chaplain  just  out  from 
England  was  staying  at  the  Palace  in  Calcutta, 
and  after  being  there  for  some  little  time  had  at 
last  quite  made  up  his  mind  that  he  was  to  remain 
and  be  one  of  the  cathedral  chaplains.  The  first 
intimation  he  had  that  this  was  not  the  case  was 
one  morning  at  family  prayers,  when  the  Bishop 
said,  "  And  we  beseech  Thy  especial  protection 
for  our  young  friend,  who  is  about  to  undertake 


 29 

the  long  and  arduous  journey  to  Peshawar."  As 
this  meant  a  journey  of  over  twelve  hundred  miles 
to  be  mostly  performed  by  dooly  dak,  the  young 
chaplain's  surprise  was  not  agreeable. 

Travelling  by  carriage  dak  was  as  great  an 
improvement  on  the  dooly  as  the  railway  is  on  the 
carriage ;  but  though  not  so  expensive  as  the 
dooly,  still  it  was  and  is  a  costly  mode  of  loco- 
motion. The  carriages  are  heavily  built,  some- 
thing on  the  pattern  of  a  four-wheel  cab,  only 
longer,  and  in  using  them  the  traveller  can 
either  lie  down  at  full  length  or  sit  up,  as  he 
pleases.  If  he  wishes  to  do  the  latter,  he  puts 
his  feet  into  a  well  there  is  in  the  centre  of  the 
carriage  ;  but  if  the  former,  the  well,  which  can 
be  filled  with  small  parcels,  such  as  travelling- 
bags,  &c.,  is  covered  over  with  a  padded  top,  and 
the  bedding  is  then  spread  out  at  full  length  in 
the  carriage,  and  this  is  the  way  travellers 
almost  always  use  them — when  night  comes,  if 
the  weather  is  cold,  closing  the  doors,  which  do 
not  open  and  shut  by  hinges,  as  in  ordinary 


30  

carriages,  but  slide  backwards  and  forwards. 
Unless  the  passenger  pays  for  the  whole  car- 
riage, he  may  find  another  person  put  in  with 
him,  which  will  naturally  make  a  very  great 
difference  in  his  comfort ;  but  this  does  not  often 
happen,  except  at  times  or  over  roads  where 
there  is  a  great  pressure  of  business.  On  the 
roof  of  the  carriage  the  luggage  is  piled,  and 
there  is  sufficient  room  for  one  or  two  servants 
to  sit  with  their  chins  resting  on  their  knees,  in 
which  position  they  sleep  as  peacefully  as  if  they 
were  lying  on  the  most  comfortable  beds. 

The  lithesomeness  of  an  Oriental  is  something 
wonderful,  and  comes  from  the  limbs  being 
accustomed  to  be  doubled  up  in  all  sorts  of 
positions  from  the  earliest  childhood.  That 
sort  of  double-jointedness  which  English  acrobats 
only  acquire  by  constant  practise  from  the  time 
they  are  three  or  four  years  old,  comes  quite 
naturally  to  every  Oriental. 

The  carriages  are  drawn  by  two  ponies ;  one 
in  a  pair  of  shafts,  and  the  other  hooked  on 


 31 

alongside  him,  and  these  are  changed  almost 
every  five  miles.  Some  of  the  daks  are  managed 
by  Government,  and  these,  though  the  most 
expensive,  are  much  the  best,  and  as  a  rule 
travel  at  a  considerable  pace ;  I  have  known 
them  in  some  cases  average  nine  and  ten  miles 
an  hour  including  stoppages.  Those  which  are 
managed  by  private  companies  are  not  nearly 
so  well  horsed,  but  even  with  the  best  there  is 
frequently  a  difficulty  about  getting  the  animals 
to  start.  Many  of  them  are  bought  because 
they  are  so  vicious  their  owners  can  do  nothing 
with  them,  and  no  doubt  they  find  a  considerable 
difference  in  their  new  life,  when  they  get  regular, 
not  to  say  hard  work,  and  by  no  means  an 
over-abundance  of  food.  You  very  soon  find 
out  the  sort  of  animals  you  have  to  do  with. 
The  harness,  which  is  of  the  simplest  pattern, 
being  arranged,  the  coachman  mounts  the  box ; 
then  commence  shouting,  tugging,  swearing  in 
Hindustani,  pushing  at  the  wheels,  and  every 
method  which  can  be  employed  to  induce  a 


32  

start.  Sometimes  the  animals  go  off  in  the 
meekest  manner,  at  others  it  takes  some  minutes 
to  get  the  vehicle  in  motion,  during  which  it 
seems  very  doubtful  whether  the  whole  turn-out 
will  not  be  smashed  to  pieces ;  but  I  must  say 
that  once  started,  the  ponies  generally  go  as 
hard  as  they  can  tear  till  the  next  post  is 
reached,  when  the  same  ordeal  probably  has 
to  be  gone  through  with  the  fresh  pair. 

Accidents  are  not  altogether  unfrequent,  for 
the  carriages  are  but  roughly  made  by  local 
builders,  and  consequently  wheels  come  off,  etc.,, 
or  possibly  the  ponies  upset  you  in  a  ditch, 
but  it  is  wonderful  how  little  actual  damage  is 
done,  and  in  all  the  years  I  spent  in  India 
I  hardly  ever  heard  of  anyone  being  the  worse 
for  one  of  these  accidents. 

Before  proceeding  further  I  would  say  that 
I  only  served  in  the  Bengal  Presidency,  and 
know  but  very  little  of  Bombay,  and  nothing 
at  all  of  Madras,  except  by  hearsay;  but  Bengal, 
by  which  I  mean  the  country  under  the  Lieu- 


 33 

tenant-Governors  of  Bengal,  the  North-Western 
Provinces,  and  the  Punjab,  and  more  directly 
under  the  control  of  the  Viceroy,  is  the  principal 
portion  of  India ;  and  besides,  though  there  may 
be  some  minor  differences,  the*  mode  of  life  all 
over  the  country  is  very  much  ,the  same,  being 
governed  by  very  similar  conditions  and  climate. 
The  different  presidencies  have^their  advantages 
in  different  ways  ;  for  instance,  I  think  Bengal 
would  admit  that  in  the  way  of  plains'  stations 
it  has  nothing  to  compare  with  Poona,  in 
Bombay,  or  Bangalore,  in  Madras.  These  are 
really  magnificent  stations,  and  though  situated 
on  the  plains  and  not  in  the  hills,  and  having 
railways  running  to  them,  they  are  considerably 
elevated  above  the  sea,  and  consequently  free 
from  the  extreme  and  oppressive  heat  which 
makes  ordinary  stations  in  the  plains  so  trying. 
Poona,  too,  is  no  very  great  distance  from  the 
sea,  and  thus  gets  the  benefit  of  the  sea  air, 
which  is  such  a  want  in  the  greater  part  of 
the  country. 

8 


34  LIFE    IN   INDIA. 

Having  said  this,  let  us  suppose  ourselves 
travelling  towards  Upper  India,  which  from 
Bombay  as  far  as  Jubbulpore  will  be  over  the 
Great  Indian  Peninsular  Railway,  and  after  that 
over  the  East  Indian  Railway.  Of  late  years 
a  new  system  of  spelling  Indian  names  and 
words,  invented  by  Dr.  Hunter,  has  come  into 
use,  and  by  this,  Jubbulpore  would  be  spelt 
Jabalpur,  and  Meerut,  for  example,  Mirat,  but  I 
have  thought  it  best  to  adhere  to  the  old- 
fashioned  way,  for  in  most  cases  the  words  look 
as  they  ought  to  sound  ;  Jubbulpore,  for  instance, 
can  only  be  pronounced  as  it  ought  to  be,  the 
only  change  that  could  be  made  to  render 
the  proper  pronunciation  more  certain  would 
be,  perhaps,  to  spell  it  Jubblepore  ;  whereas  if 
I  adopted  the  Hunterian  method,  most  people 
would  inevitably  pronounce  the  words  wrong. 

Soon  after  leaving  Bombay  the  line  com- 
mences ascending  some  hills  or  ghats,  as  they 
are  called  here,  and  for  a  time  there  is  a  very 
curious  specimen  of  railway  travelling.  The 


 35 

line  has  to  make  considerable  ascents  and  goes 
zig-zagging  about  in  a  very  peculiar  way,  in  fact 
you  will  at  times  find  yourself  going  in  exactly 
the  opposite  direction  to  that  in  which  you  were 
going  a  few  minutes  previously.  This  portion 
of  the  journey  has  to  be  done  very  slowly, 
and  with  engines  made  specially  for  the  purpose ; 
but  the  scenery  in  these  ghats  is  extremely  pretty, 
and  the  time  (if  by  day)  does  not  seem  long 
before  the  top  is  reached,  and  the  train  once 
more  speeding  onwards  in  the  usual  manner. 

The  ordinary  traveller  will  have  got  into  a 
carriage  at  Bombay  which  runs  right  through, 
without  changing,  to  Allahabad,  and  will  be 
about  thirty-six  hours  on  the  road.  I  should 
have  mentioned  that  Indian  first  and  second- 
class  railway  carriages  are  all  fitted  with  washing 
apparatus,  so  there  is  no  more  difficulty  in 
dressing  than  there  is  in  going  to  bed  in  them. 
The  train  stops  long  enough  at  certain  stations 
to  enable  the  traveller  to  get  his  meals,  and 
it  struck  me  that  the  refreshment  rooms  between 

3  * 




Bombay  and  Jubbulpore  were  better  than  any 
others  I  had  met  with  in  India. 

An  officer  going  up  country  with  troops  would 
be  longer  on  the  road,  as  there  are  rest  barracks 
at  certain  intervals,  where  the  troops  are  dis- 
embarked from  the  trains  and  kept  for  twelve 
hours  or  so.  It  is  not,  of  course,  possible  to 
provide  every  soldier,  woman,  and  child  with 
lying-down  accommodation  in  a  train,  and  con- 
sequently it  is  necessary  to  make  frequent  halts 
for  rest,  and  to  enable  them  to  get  the  meals 
which  are  provided  for  them  at  these  rest 
barracks  or  camps  as  the  case  may  be. 

I  would  here  make  some  remarks  about  rail- 
way travelling  as  it  is  usually  conducted  in 
India,  for  it  differs  in  many  respects  from  that 
in  England.  Although  railways  are  largely  used 
by  the  natives,  the  companies  do  not  seem  to 
find  that  it  pays  them  to  run  many  passenger 
trains  in  the  day,  and  the  usual  number  over 
the  different  lines  are  one  in  the  morning  and 
another  in  the  evening.  There  may  be  one,  or 


 37 

at  the  most  two,  more  running  in  the  course  of 
the  day,  but  these  are  generally  between  stations 
not  far  apart,  and  are  intended  to  meet  purely 
local  requirements.  At  the  same  time  the  goods 
traffic  must  pay  well,  for  it  has  usually  been 
the  case  in  India,  before  starting  a  railway 
company,  for  the  Government  to  guarantee  a 
dividend  of  five  per  cent.,  and  I  believe  I  am 
correct  in  saying  that  in  most  cases  this  rate 
and  even  more  has  been  earned  by  the  companies 
for  themselves  very  soon  after  the  opening  of 
their  lines. 

Accidents  occur  very  rarely,  and,  indeed,  there 
would  be  little  excuse  if  it  were  otherwise,  as 
the  speed  is  very  moderate,  and  the  only  thing 
which  ever  seems  to  increase  it  is  the  time 
wasted  at  railway  stations  while  the  guards  are 
talking  to  their  friends  or  otherwise  dawdling 
about,  which  necessitates  the  train  being  pushed 
along  somewhat  to  make  up  the  loss.  Of  course 
the  risk  of  accidents  is  very  much  diminished 
by  there  being  so  few  trains  run,  and  another 


38  LIFE    IN   INDIA. 

thing  which  tends  in  the  same  direction  is  the 
fact  that  almost  all  the  lines  are  only  single 
gauge  ;  the  one  exception  to  this  rule  being, 
I  believe,  a  comparatively  short  bit  of  about 
two  hundred  miles  from  Calcutta  up  the  East 
Indian  Eailway.  I  must  confess,  though,  my 
wonder  that  there  have  never  been  any  accidents 
at  any  of  the  marvellous  railway  bridges  in 
the  country,  and  I  can  only  say  that  the  absence 
of  them  is  a  striking  testimony  to  the  ability 
of  the  constructors,  and  points  to  these  bridges 
as  perfect  specimens  of  engineering  skill.  Any- 
one who  has  passed  over  the  bridges  across 
the  Ganges  at  Cawupore  and  Rajghat,  and  over 
those  across  the  Jhelum  and  Sutlej,  which  vary 
in  length  from  two  miles  downwards,  must 
admit  that  the  railway  engineers  in  India  have 
well  carried  out  the  work  entrusted  to  them. 

Almost  all  the  plains'  stations  in  Upper  India 
east  of  Lahore  can  now  be  reached  by  train, 
or  at  least  those  which  are  military  stations 
can  be.  There  are  some  few,  such  as  Seetapore 


 39 

and  Ferozepore,  which  are  military  stations,  and 
smaller  ones  where  only  civilians  reside,  which 
still  lie  off  the  lines ;  but  the  railway  system 
has  been  so  developed  of  late  years  that  they 
cannot  any  of  them  be  at  a  very  great  distance 
from  it.  In  October,  1880,  the  Punjab  Northern 
State  Eailway,  running  from  Jhelum  to  Kawal 
Pindi,  was  opened  ;  and  when  this  is  completed 
to  Peshawar,  which  it  very  soon  will  be,  there 
will  be  an  unbroken  line  of  railway  from 
Calcutta  to  Peshawar. 

Where  the  stations  do  not  touch  the  railway, 
they  almost  invariably  have  excellent  roads 
running  to  them,  with  dak  carriages  plying  at 
very  reasonable  rates.  When  talking  about  dak 
travelling,  I  might  have  mentioned  that  there 
are,  I  suppose,  few  countries  in  the  world 
which  have  finer  roads  than  India.  In  the 
first  place  they  are  mostly  very  level,  and  they 
are,  as  a  rule,  kept  in  very  good  order.  They 
are  divided  into  several  classes.  The  first  class 
are  metalled  and  bridged  throughout.  The 


40  LIFE   IN   INDIA. 

second  class  are  fairly  good  roads — bridged,  but 
not  metalled  everywhere ;  and  though  perhaps 
dog-carts  could  be  used  over  them,  they  would 
not  do  for  dak  carriages.  After  these,  if  I 
remember  aright,  there  are  two  more  classes, 
the  last  being  simply  country  lanes,  and,  as 
regards  wheeled  conveyances,  only  fit  for  bullock- 
carts. 

The  metalling  is  done  with  a  substance  called 
kunkur,  which  looks  somewhat  like  petrified  clay, 
very  hard,  and  suitable  for  road-making,  which 
is  dug  out  of  pits  in  small  pieces.  When  a 
road  requires  mending  it  is  picked  up  where 
necessary,  hunkur  laid  down  on  the  picked  parts, 
and  after  it  has  been  well  saturated  with  water 
it  is  beaten  into  the  road  with  iron  rammers 
by  gangs  of  coolies. 

All  the  roads  along  which  dak  carriages  ply 
are  metalled,  and  it  would  be  hard  to  find 
a  finer  one  than  the  Grand  Trunk  Eoad,  which 
runs  from  Calcutta  to  Peshawar,  a  distance  of 
over  twelve  hundred  miles,  and  which  was,  until 


LIFE    IN   INDIA.  41 

recently,  a  first-class  road,  metalled  throughout. 
A  first-class  road  I  suppose  it  still  is,  but  the 
growth  of  the  railway  system  has  made  this 
road  of  somewhat  less  importance  than  it  was 
formerly,  and  I  believe  a  few  small  portions 
of  it  here  and  there  are  no  longer  metalled, 
but  it  is  still  of  immense  value,  and  will  ever 
remain  a  monument  of  British  engineering  in 
India. 

Places  in  the  country  where  the  English  have 
settled  down  are  always  called  stations,  and 
partly,  I  suppose,  from  the  difficulty  of  finding 
any  other  name  by  which  to  describe  them. 
Towns  or  villages  would  not  be  applicable, 
because  the  houses  are  built  too  far  apart,  though 
these  names  are  used  and  are  correct  enough 
in  describing  native  communities.  In  stations, 
houses  are  built  more  or  less  separately  from  one 
another,  and  usually  each  is  surrounded  with  a 
good-sized  piece  of  grass  land  called  its  "  com- 
pound." 

There  is  a  very  great  difference  in  stations  in 


4Z  

India,  chiefly  owing  to  difference  in  size,  and 
consequently  in  importance,  and  it  is  not  by  any 
means  the  largest  which  are  always  the  most 
pleasant  to  live  in,  though  in  almost  all  there  is 
no  lack  of  society.  Every  station  of  any  impor- 
tance has  its  club,  and  people  meet  at  each 
others'  houses  daily,  to  play  whatever  game 
happens  to  be  in  vogue.  Formerly  it  was  cro- 
quet ;  then  that  was  superseded  by  badminton  ; 
now  nothing  is  thought  of  but  lawn  tennis,  and 
-a  capital  game  for  India  it  is  too,  bringing  people 
together,  and  inducing  them  to  take  exercise 
when  otherwise  they  would  probably  feel  too 
languid  to  move  out  of  their  chairs.  It  is  on 
account  of  this  that  we  so  seldom  see  retired 
Anglo-Indians  settled  down  in  the  country  in 
England.  They  have  for  the  greater  part  of 
their  lives  been  accustomed  to  meet  their  friends 
at  one  house  or  another  almost  daily,  and 
English  country  life  is  to  them  insupportably 
dull.  Consequently,  when  they  have  finally  done 
with  India,  they  settle  in  London,  Cheltenham, 


 43 

Bath,  Edinburgh,  Dublin,  or  somewhere  where 
they  can  be  sure  of  finding  or  making  friends, 
and  seeing  them  constantly. 

Having  brought  our  traveller  up  the  line  as  far 
as  Allahabad,  it  will,  perhaps,  be  as  well  to  say 
something  about  that  place  before  going  further. 
It  is  a  very  large  station,  measuring  several  miles 
each  way,  and  for  some  years  past  it  has  been 
growing  in  importance.  One  cause  of  this  is  that 
it  is  the  capital  and  the  winter  residence  of  the 
Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  North-Western  Pro- 
vinces,* and  the  High  Court  or  head-quarters  of 
the  law  courts  of  the  North-Western  Provinces 
are  here  also.  Then  it  is  a  very  important 
centre  of  railway  traffic,  as  the  East  Indian 
Railway  passes  through  it  and  has  its  branch 

*  There  is  no  particular  reason  that  these  should  now 
be  called  the  North-Western  Provinces,  except  for  the 
difficulty  of  finding  a  fresh  name.  Previously  to  the 
annexation  of  the  Punjab,  they  did  constitute  the 
extreme  north-west  boundary  of  the  British  possessions, 
but  now  they  lie  somewhere  in  the  centre  of  British 
territory  in  upper  India. 


44  LIFE    IN   INDIA. 

line  running  towards  Bombay  from  it ;  besides, 
there  is  here  a  large  establishment  of  railway 
workshops,  all  of  which  increases  the  Euro- 
pean population  of  the  place.  It  is,  too,  the 
head-quarters  of  a  division  of  the  Bengal  army, 
and  though  it  has  not  so  many  troops  quartered 
in  it  as  some  stations  have,  this  is  rather  fortu- 
nate, as  it  is  by  no  means  very  healthy,  and  is 
not  unfrequently  visited  by  outbreaks  of  cholera. 
In  India,  summer  and  winter  are  always  spoken 
of  as  the  "  hot  weather  "  and  the  "  cold  weather," 
and  in  Allahabad  the  hot  weather  sets  in  some- 
what early — in  fact,  I  think  punkahs  are  in  use 
there  in  March,  and  they  are  kept  at  work  till  well 
into  November.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  con- 
siderable recommendations.  Its  society  is  larger 
and  more  varied  than  in  any  other  station  in  the 
North-Western  Provinces.  Good,  if  expensive, 
houses  can  be  got  there.  It  has  a  most  excellent 
club,  and  some  beautiful  gardens,  which  are 
being  improved  every  year.  Its  great  want  is 
that  it  has  none  of  the  old  native  buildings  for 


 45 

which  Agra,  Delhi,  Lucknow,  &c.  are  famous, 
and  which  are  so  beautiful.  Lucknow,  again,  is 
a  very  large  station — in  fact,  you  may  have  to 
drive  six  or  seven  miles  to  call  on  people  in  it — 
and  I  think  opinion  varies  a  good  deal  with, 
regard  to  it ;  with  some  it  is  very  popular,  while 
with  others  it  is  just  the  reverse. 

Until  lately,  Oudh  was  ruled  by  a  chief  com- 
missioner of  its  own,  and  there  was  a  very  good 
Government  House  at  Lucknow,  which  is  the 
capital  of  the  province,  but  recently  Oudh  has 
been  tacked  on  to  the  North-Western  Provinces, 
the  Lieutenant  -  Governor  of  which  spends  a 
certain  portion  of  each  cold  season  at  Luck- 
now.  It  has  a  very  large  garrison,  and  the 
society  is  consequently  more  military  than 
civilian. 

Meerut  is,  as  a  rule,  a  very  popular  station  ; 
for  while  there  is  no  want  of  society  there,  the 
place  is  not  straggling,  and  there  is  no  difficulty 
in  meeting  your  friends.  It  is  generally  looked 
upon  as  a  very  good  place  from  which  to  get 


46  

sport,  and  it  has  the  advantage  besides  of  not 
being  far  from  several  hill  stations. 

Umballa,  too,  is  a  favourite  station,  .partly  for 
itself,  but  chiefly  on  account  of  its  proximity  to 
Simla.  This  is  principally  a  military  station, 
and  comparatively  speaking  a  new  one,  for  the 
barracks  were  laid  out  and  built  under  the  super- 
vision of  Lord  Napier  of  Magdala  when  he  was 
Executive  Engineer  there,  between  thirty  and 
forty  years  ago.  In  Indian  stations,  the  portions 
where  the  military  live  are  called  the  cantonments, 
while  those  occupied  by  the  civilians  are  called  the 
civil  lines,  and  the  proximity  of  the  two  varies 
much  in  different  places.  At  Umballa,  the  prin- 
cipal part  of  the  station — that  is  to  say,  where  the 
large  majority  of  houses  are,  also  all  the  shops 
and  hotels — is  the  cantonments  ;  and  the  civil 
lines,  where  the  civil  officers  chiefly  live,  are 
three  miles  away,  close  to  the  city. 

This  is  another  peculiarity  of  Indian  stations, 
that  they  mostly  have  close  to  them  large  towns 
(always  called  cities),  consisting  of  houses  closely 


 47 

packed  together,  only  separated  by  very  narrow 
streets,  and  inhabited  by  thousands  of  natives. 
The  fact  is,  that  the  cities  existed  long  before 
the  cantonments,  the  latter  having  been  built  as 
the  country  has  been  over-run  and  occupied  by 
the  British.  The  cities  are  generally  under  the 
control  of  municipal  committees,  which  are  chiefly 
managed  by  the  civil  authorities,  and  with  which 
the  military  have  nothing  to  do ;  while  the  can- 
tonments with  all  the  bazaars  situated  in  them 
are  entirely  under  the  management  of  the  mili- 
tary. It  will  frequently  be  found  that  the  civil 
lines  are  close  to  the  city,  as  it  is  most  conve- 
nient for  the  civil  officers  to  live  near  the  people 
with  whom  they  are  chiefly  concerned.  And  to 
take  the  case  of  Lahore.  It  is  really  a  station 
by  itself;  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  Punjab, 
with  his  secretaries,  and  the  chief  court  judges, 
&c.,  living  there  ;  while  Meean  Meer,  which  is 
the  military  station  or  cantonment  of  Lahore,  is 
four  miles  distant  from  it.  I  daresay  I  shall 
later  on  have  more  to  say  about  various  stations 


48  

in  India,  but  I  would  turn  now  to  the  subject  of 
settling  down  in  the  country,  and  the  first  thing 
to  do  is  to  get  a  house. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  except  in  the 
presidency  towns  of  Calcutta,  Madras,  and  Bom- 
bay, there  are  no  such  things  as  lodgings  in 
India.  There  are  certainly  hotels  in  the  larger 
stations,  but  these  are  mostly  used  only  tempo- 
rarily, and  practically  everyone  makes  up  his 
mind  that  he  must  have  a  house.  Bachelors  as  a 
rule  join  together  in  different  numbers  to  take 
houses,  and  a  bachelor  coming  out  from  England 
alone  may  find  a  friend  quite  willing  to  give 
him  accommodation.  But  still  everyone  has  to 
get  a  house  in  some  shape  or  another,  and  I 
would  say  at  once  that,  in  settling  down,  there 
is  nothing  of  greater  importance  than  securing  a 
good  one,  for  it  is  a  matter  in  which  people  are 
too  apt  to  indulge  in  false  economy. 

I  have  already  said  that  the  rupee  is  supposed 
to  represent  two  shillings,  so  to  convert  rupees 
into  pounds  it  is  only  necessary  to  cut  off  the  0 


 49 

at  the  end  of  the  sum.  Houses  in  the  plains  are 
always  let  by  the  month,  and  you  will  find  people 
for  the  sake  of  saving  twenty  or  thirty  rupees  a 
month  (aye,  and  where  the  saving  is  of  no  abso- 
lute necessity  either),  taking  a  bad  house  instead 
of  a  good  one.  They  overlook  the  fact  that,  if 
their  bad  house  induces  serious  illness  which 
drives  them  to  England,  even  if  it  does  not  kill 
them  outright,  their  economy  will  be  a  very  poor 
one.  No  ;  you  may  take  it  for  granted  that  the 
first  thing  to  do  is  to  get  the  best  house,  as  far 
as  health  is  concerned,  that  you  can  possibly 
afford.  You  will  be  able  to  see  for  yourself 
whether  the  house  is  well  situated  and  likely  to 
be  on  well-drained  ground,  &c.  while  a  visit  to  it 
will  probably  inform  you  as  to  its  ventilation. 
Besides  this,  you  can  make  inquiries,  from  which 
you  will  be  able  to  learn  what  reputation  it  bears 
as  regards  healthiness,  coolness,  &c. 

There  is  by  no  means  a  superabundance  of 
houses  in  most  Indian  stations,  and  though  it  is 
not  generally  difficult  to  get  one  of  some  sort,  it 

4 


50  

is  very  likely  that  you  may  not  be  able  to  get  at 
once  exactly  what  you  would  wish,  and  in  this 
case  the  only  thing  to  do  is  to  secure  the  refusal 
of  some  house  that  would  suit  you  in  case  it 
might  be  vacant  before  you  leave  the  station. 
Houses  differ  very  much  in  temperature,  and 
though  a  difference  of  three  or  four  degrees  in 
the  thermometer  does  not  sound  much,  it  means 
more  than  people  living  in  England  can  suppose. 
The  difference  is  very  often  due  to  the  roofing, 
which  is  of  two  kinds,  either  thatched  or  flat 
masonry — pucca,  as  it  is  called  in  Hindustani. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  thatched  houses  are 
much  the  coolest,  and  the  chief  thing  against 
them  is  the  possibility  of  their  catching  fire,  but 
this  very  rarely  occurs,  and  there  is  not  often  a 
fire  in  use  to  give  rise  to  the  danger.  Perhaps, 
in  December,  January,  and  February,  a  fire  may 
be  lighted  in  the  drawing-room  in  the  evenings, 
but  seldom  more  than  this  ;  and,  personally,  I 
must  say,  I  should  always  run  the  remote  risk 
of  being  burnt  out,  and  choose  a  thatched  house, 


 51 

on  account  of  its  greater  coolness  in  summer.  It 
is  wonderful  how  soon  one  gets  accustomed  to 
the  heat.  In  England,  I  have  gone  into  a  green- 
house, which  felt  suffocatingly  hot,  and  on  look- 
ing at  the  thermometer,  found  that  the  tempe- 
rature was  only  between  seventy  degrees  and 
eighty  degrees.  In  India  you  would  think  your 
house  perfectly  cool  at  that,  and  punkahs  are 
not  often  used  till  the  thermometer  has  got  past 
eighty-three  or  eighty-four  degrees. 

Having  chosen  your  house,  the  next  thing  to 
do  is  to  furnish  it,  as  all  houses  in  the  plains  are 
let  absolutely  bare  of  any  furniture  whatever, 
and  this  is  not  such  an  easy  matter  as  dwellers 
in  England  might  suppose.  There  are  no 
upholsterers  except  in  the  presidency  towns,  and, 
even  were  they  more  accessible,  their  prices  are 
prohibitive  to  most  people.  The  system  is  for 
people  to  sell  to  each  other.  When  anyone  is 
leaving  a  station,  either  to  return  to  England  or 
on  transfer  to  some  other  station,  he  makes  out  .a 

list  of  what  he  does  not  wish  to  retain,  with  the 

4  * 


52  

price  noted  against  each  article.  This  list  is 
then  taken  round  by  a  servant  from  house  to 
house,  and  those  who  want  any  of  the  articles 
contained  in  it  put  their  names  down  against 
them.  If  the  seller  cannot  dispose  of  all  his  pro- 
perty in  this  way,  he  probably  has  an  auction  of 
what  remains,  which  is  bought  up  at  very  low 
rates  by  the  native  shopkeepers,  who  buy  the 
things  in  the  hope  that  when  some  new  comer  is 
in  want  of  furniture,  they  may  be  able  to  realize 
several  cents,  per  cent,  in  relieving  his  necessity. 
If  a  new  arrival  happens  to  find  one  of  these 
lists  in  circulation,  he  will  probably  be  able  to 
do  a  good  deal  towards  fitting  out  his  house,  for 
houses  in  India  are  not  nearly  so  elaborately 
furnished  as  those  in  England ;  but  if  not,  he 
must  get  what  is  absolutely  necessary  from  the 
natives  in  the  bazaars,  and  then  look  out  for 
opportunities,  such  as  I  have  described,  for  com- 
pleting his  furnishing. 

Houses  in  the  hills  are  generally  papered,  but 
never  in  the  plains.     Here  they  have  plastered 


 53 

walls,  either  white,  or  washed  over  with  some 
tinted  wash,  and  darker  coloured  lines  are  painted 
round  the  edges,  with  patterns  of  flowers  or 
something  of  that  sort  at  the  corners.  The 
first  thing  always  done  is  to  cover  the  floors, 
which  are  of  plaster  and  not  of  wood,  completely 
with  coarse  matting,  over  which  is  placed  either 
finer  matting,  carpets,  or,  more  usually,  what 
are  called  dhurries.  These  are  a  sort  of  drugget 
made  entirely  of  cotton,  and  are  about  the 
cheapest  covering  that  can  be  used  for  floors  in 
India.  They  are  to  be  bought  of  different  sizes 
and  patterns  in  the  bazaars,  but  the  best  I  have 
ever  seen  are  those  made  in  the  jails,  and  if  the 
furnisher  cannot  pick  up  one  that  suits  him,  his 
best  plan  will  be  to  order  one  from  the  nearest 
jail,  for  in  the  first  place  it  will  be  made  to  any 
size  he  may  wish,  and,  in  the  next,  the  jails  have 
much  nicer  patterns,  and  are  much  more  careful 
in  their  manufacture  than  the  ordinary  weavers 
are. 

Carpets  are  better  suited  for  furnishing  houses 


54  

in  the  hills  than  in  the  plains,  as  in  the  latter 
they  look  too  hot,  and  would,  moreover,  pro- 
bably be  soon  destroyed  by  white  ants.  It  is  a 
very  difficult  matter  to  keep  one's  house  clear  of 
these  insects,  and  if  they  once  get  in,  they  will 
make  short  work  of  anything  except  china  or 
metal.  There  is  one  particular  matting,  though, 
which  they  will  not  touch,  called  moonj  matting, 
and  this  is  very  useful  for  putting  down  in  halls — 
I  was  going  to  add  ''and  staircases,"  forgetting 
to  mention  that  no  houses  in  the  plains,  except 
in  the  presidency  towns,  and  but  very  few  in  the 
hills,  have  any  rooms  upstairs.  Nothing  is  nicer 
for  floors  in  the  plains  than  fine  matting,  which 
can  be  got  from  Calcutta,  but  it  is  expensive, 
and  does  not  wear  very  well.  If  carpets  are 
wanted,  very  nice  ones  can  be  got  at  Mirza- 
pore,  made  to  order.  They  are  extremely  hand- 
some, wear  very  well,  and  cost  about  five  rupees 
per  square  yard,  which  is,  of  course,  dear  com- 
pared to  those  made  at  home,  but  they  will  wear 
out  two  or  three  English  carpets.  I  have  noticed 


 55 

that  the  sale  of  them  in  London  has  evidently 
been  increasing  considerably  of  late.  Still  more 
elaborate  ones  are  made  in  the  jails,  and  amongst 
them  the  Lahore  jail  is  noted  for  its  manu- 
facture ;  but  if  I  remember  aright,  all  the  carpets 
made  there  are  ten  rupees  per  square  yard,  and 
a  purchaser  would  have  to  wait  a  long  time 
before  he  would  get  a  carpet  from  Lahore,  as 
they  always  have  a  number  of  orders  registered, 
both  from  England  and  America.  Notwith- 
standing their  high  prices,  I  do  not  suppose  the 
Lahore  jail  would  be  able  to  supply  a  private 
individual  with  a  carpet  under  two  or  three 
years.  When  dances  are  given  on  these  plas- 
tered floors,  the  plan  adopted  is  to  stretch 
canvas  cloths  tightly  over  them,  which,  being 
well  waxed,  make  very  good  floors  for  dancing 
on.  Their  chief  failing  is,  that  they  have  not 
the  elasticity  of  boarded  floors,  and  consequently 
are  more  tiring. 

I  should  mention  that  there   are  some  places 
where  furniture  is  better  made  and  more  easily 


56  

bought  than  others.  Bareilly,  for  instance,  in 
the  North-West  Provinces,  is  noted  for  the  fur- 
niture turned  out  there  by  the  native  carpenters. 
They  work  slowly,  as  all  natives  do,  but  their 
work  is  well  finished,  and  they  use  good  and 
well-seasoned  wood,  the  consequence  being  that 
orders  for  furniture  are  frequently  sent  to  Bareilly 
from  considerable  distances. 

While  furnishing  his  house,  the  new  arrival 
will  also  be  completing  his  establishment  of 
servants,  which  entails  getting  a  considerable 
number,  as  they  will  not  do  two  or  three 
different  sorts  of  work,  as  servants  will  do  in 
England.  First,  as  regards  cooks.  The  best 
in  the  country  are  known  as  mugs,  and  come 
/rom  Chittagong  and  the  district  round  it  on  the 
Bay  of  Bengal.  Why  these  men  should  be  the 
best,  I  cannot  say,  but  they  are,  and  they  get  all 
the  best  paid  service  in  Calcutta.  At  Govern- 
ment House,  the  head  is  almost  always  a  French 
cook,  but  the  four  next  to  him  are  mujs,  and 
very  good  cooks  they  are.  They  are  not  easy  to 


 57 

get  out  of  Calcutta,  and  are  besides  very  expen- 
sive, their  wages  ranging  from  forty  rupees  a 
month  down  to  about  twenty,  which  are  enor- 
mous for  Oriental  servants.  However,  the  only 
thing  to  do  is  to  examine  a  cook's  characters, 
and  take  him  if  he  seems  likely  to  do,  changing 
Mm  if  on  trial  he  is  found  not  to  suit. 

One  hint  I  would  give  to  housekeepers,  which 
is  either  to  visit  the  kitchen  daily,  and  see  that 
it  has  been  properly  cleaned  out,  or  never  go 
near  it  at  all.  Anyone  who  has  been  accus- 
tomed to  a  nice  cleanly-kept  English  kitchen, 
would  be  horrified  at  what  she  would  see  in  her 
new  home,  and  really,  unless  prepared  to  exercise 
an  amount  of  energy  which  it  is  very  difficult 
after  some  stay  in  India  to  find  available,  it  is 
best  to  eat  what  is  put  before  one,  asking  no 
questions,  unless  such  a  glaring  case  of  uncleanli- 
ness  comes  under  one's  notice  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  overlook  it. 

There  is  one  thing  that  needs  care,  which  is  to 
ensure  the  cooking-utensils  being  tinned  regu- 


68  

larly  twice  a  month,  as  they  are  all  made  of 
copper,  and  unless  this  is  done  you  are  very 
likely  to  find  yourself  poisoned  in  a  more  or  less 
serious  degree.  Besides  this,  it  is  necessary  to 
see  that  the  tinning  used  is  pure,  for  the  natives 
are  very  fond  of  using  stuff  with  a  great  deal  of 
lead  in  it,  which  is  nearly  as  dangerous  as  the 
verdigris  on  the  copper.  Of  course  the  cook 
ought  to  attend  to  all  this,  but  if  you  trust  to 
what  Indian  servants  ought  to  do,  you  will 
frequently  find  yourself  in  awkward  difficulties. 

People  with  large  establishments  have  khansa- 
mahs,  who  occupy  somewhat  the  same  position 
that  the  housekeeper  does  in  England.  They 
are  really  the  head  of  all  the  servants,  issuing 
orders  to  the  others,  and  they  are  responsible 
for  the  manufacture  of  all  the  sweets,  cakes, 
puddings,  preserves,  &c.  The  bearer  is  really 
the  valet,  taking  charge  of  his  master's  clothes, 
&c.,  while  the  care  and  management  of  all  the 
lamps  fall  also  to  his  lot. 

There  are   certain  places  which  are  noted  for 




supplying  the  best  servants  of  different  classes. 
For  instance,  Furruckabad  always  used  to  be  the 
great  place  for  bearers,  Lucknow  for  Icitmutgars 
(table  attendants),  and  Meerut  for  diizees. 
(tailors).  In  former  days  people  used  to  put  the 
greatest  trust  in  their  bearers,  making  over  to 
them  all  their  keys,  money  up  to,  perhaps,  some 
thousands  of  rupees,  and,  in  a  word,  all  their 
possessions.  Very  faithfully,  too,  these  men 
fulfilled  their  trust,  but,  for  some  reason  or 
another,  I  do  not  think  this  system  prevails  now 
as  much  as  it  used  to  do.  I  suppose  this  arises 
from  altered  circumstances,  perhaps  from  the 
more  frequent  visits  to  England,  which  would 
entail  the  more  frequent  change  in  servants ;  but 
whatever  the  cause,  there  is  certainly,  I  think,  a 
difference.  You  will  also  find  people,  especially 
if  they  are  not  well  off,  rolling  up  the  bearer 
and  kitmutgar  into  one,  and  this  brings  us  to 
the  consideration  of  the  latter.  These  are  the 
footmen,  waiting  at  table,  cleaning  the  plate  (or 
rather  not  cleaning  it,  for  I  hardly  ever  saw  plate 


60  

decently  cleaned  in  India  yet),  and  such  like. 
Besides  this,  as  I  have  said,  they  very  often  do 
bearers'  work  as  well,  and  then  only  resemble 
their  prototype  in  England,  who  combines  the 
duties  of  valet  and  footman. 

In  addition  a  mussalchi  will  be  required,  who 
acts  as  scullery-maid,  and  does  all  the  washing- 
up.  They  kill  all  the  poultry  used  in  the  kitchen, 
and  very  brutal  they  often  are  at  this  work.  It 
seems  hardly  credible,  but  there  is  a  theory 
amongst  native  servants  that  the  only  way  to  kill 
a  turkey  properly  is  to  tear  its  tongue  out  and 
then  leave  it  to  bleed  to  death !  Directly  I 
found  this  out  I  gave  orders  that  all  the  poultry, 
both  turkeys  and  fowls,  used  in  my  house  were 
to  be  killed  by  having  their  heads  chopped  off  at 
a  single  blow,  which  is  infinitely  the  more  mer- 
ciful way  of  putting  an  end  to  them,  and  took 
<;are  to  ensure  the  orders  being  adhered  to.  If 
anyone  in  India  who  may  happen  to  read  this 
paper  gives  similar  orders,  it  will  not  have  been 
written  in  vain. 


 61 

Besides  these  servants  every  house  has  its 
own  dhoby,  or  washerman,  and  I  may  here  men- 
tion that,  with  the  exception  of  ayahs  who  per- 
form the  duties  of  nurses  or  ladies'  maids,  all 
servants  in  India  are  men.  Dhobies  vary  a  good 
deal,  but  some  of  them  wash  very  well,  though 
they  knock  one's  things  to  pieces  a  good  deal,  as 
washing  is  usually  done  by  beating  the  clothes 
on  a  board  or  stone  in  a  running  stream ; 
still  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  know  that  the 
man  is  at  your  beck  and  call,  that  you  have 
only  to  send  out  to  him  whatever  you  want 
washed  or  ironed,  and  that  it  will  be  done  at 
once. 

Another  indispensable  servant  is  the  sweeper, 
or,  as  he  is  often  called,  "  the  Knight  of  the 
Broom."  He  sweeps  out  all  the  rooms  in  the 
house,  empties  slops,  &c.  while  the  bearer  does 
the  dusting.  Hindoo  servants  are  of  different 
castes,  but  the  sweeper  is  the  lowest  of  all.  He, 
for  instance,  will  eat  the  leavings  from  his 
master's  table,  while  a  Hindoo  of  a  higher  caste 


62  

would  not  so  much  as  touch  the  plate  or  dish 
containing  them. 

The  bheesty,  or  water-carrier,  provides  the 
water-supply,  as  you  very  rarely  see  such  things 
as  pipes  and  taps,  and  he  does  this  in  the  plains 
by  drawing  water  from  wells  and  filling  his 
mussuck,  which  he  then  carries  slung  from  one 
shoulder.  The  mussuck  is  made  from  the  skin  of 
a  goat,  which  is  taken  off  whole,  when  it  is  sewn 
up  and  greased  till  it  is  pretty  well  waterproof. 
In  the  hills  water  is  usually  collected  from 
springs,  but  at  Simla  there  is  a  supply  brought 
by  pipes  from  about  six  miles  off,  and  laid  on  all 
over  the  station,  the  bheesties  filling  their  mussucks 
at  the  various  taps.  Bheesties,  I  think,  are  noted 
for  being  more  faithful  and  giving  less  trouble 
than  any  of  the  servants.  Of  course  carrying 
water  is  not  a  very  difficult  duty  to  perform,  but 
bheesties  are  usually  ready  to  do  whatever  they 
are  wanted,  and  to  turn  their  hands  to  anything 
which  does  not  affect  their  religion,  and  they 
are  noted  for  having  been  specially  faithful  to  us 


 63 

in  the  Mutiny.  Troops  when  on  the  march, 
when  on  field  days  in  sham,  or  in  action  in 
earnest,  are  always  accompanied  by  bheesties,  and 
dozens  of  stories  are  told  of  how,  during  the 
Mutiny,  they  went  anywhere  and  under  any  fire, 
to  give  our  wounded  soldiers  water. 

Another  servant  that  is  generally  required, 
•certainly  in  a  house  where  there  are  any  children, 
is  a  dirzee  or  tailor,  for,  as  I  have  said,  ayahs 
know  nothing  of  needlework,  and  the  dirzees  do 
all  the  making  and  mending  which  in  England 
would  be  done  by  ladies'  maids  or  nurses.  These 
dirzees  are  wonderful  fellows  :  not  one  in  a 
thousand  knows  anything  of  measuring,  but  give 
them  a  pattern,  and  they  will  copy  it  most 
-exactly. 

Altogether  it  will  be  seen  that  the  house  ser- 
vants are  numerous,  and  they  vary  in  number 
.according  to  the  position  and  means  of  the 
owner.  I  would  now  make  one  remark,  which 
is,  that  it  is  a  great  mistake  not  to  treat  your 
servants  kindly.  The  reader  who  knows  nothing 


64  

of  India  says,  no  doubt,  "  Why  should  I  treat 
them  unkindly  ?  "  But,  in  truth,  there  are  many 
things  out  there  to  try  the  temper  and  make 
people  less  patient  than  they  are  in  England. 
Ill  health,  which  is  not  unfrequent,  the  heat,  the 
lying  and  perhaps  cheating  of  servants,  and  very 
often  their  dirty  habits,  render  it  very  difficult 
always  to  keep  the  temper.  But  individual 
characters  very  soon  become  known  all  through 
the  bazaars,  and  the  best  servants  invariably  go 
to  those  who  have  the  reputation  of  being  the 
best  masters. 

It  is  hardly  possible  to  expect  an  Oriental 
always  to  speak  the  truth,  but  the  less  your 
servant  fears  you  the  more  ready  will  he  be 
to  speak  it ;  and  as  regards  cheating,  there  is- 
one  way  in  which  the  servant  always  makes  a 
profit  at  the  cost  of  the  master,  and  which  is 
generally  recognised  as  legitimate.  This  is  by 
taking  from  all  native  shopkeepers  dustooree, 
which  translated  means  "  custom,"  and  corre- 
sponds to  "perquisites"  in  English.  The  rule 


 65 

is  for  the  shopkeeper  to  pay  one  anna  in  the 
rupee  (or  one-sixteenth  of  the  rupee)  to  the 
servant  who  purchases  the  goods,  and  of  course 
the  tradesman  takes  care  that  the  loss  does  not 
fall  on  him,  but  on  the  purchaser,  fixing  the 
price  of  his  goods  with  this  view. 

Besides  the  house-servants,  there  are  those  for 
out-door  work  to  be  provided,  and  first  for  the 
stables.  Biding  and  driving  are  not  luxuries  in 
India — they  are  necessities,  and  everyone  has  to 
keep  a  conveyance  of  some  sort.  In  England 
one  man  is  supposed  to  look  after  two  horses. 
In  the  East  it  is  just  the  reverse,  and  there  are 
two  servants  to  each  horse.  One  is  the  syce  or 
groom,  the  other  is  the  grass-cutter. 

I  should  explain  that  in  most  parts  of  India 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  hay.  The  grass-cutters 
go  out  daily,  grubbing  up  the  grass  which  they 
find  in  fields  or  by  the  roadside,  and  making  it 
up  into  bundles.  It  is  poor-looking  stuff,  but 
still  it  is  wonderful  how  the  horses  and  ponies 
thrive  on  it.  The  syce  always  stays  at  home, 

5 


66  LIFE    IN   INDIA. 

grooming  his  horse,  cleaning  harness,  and  so  forth, 
ready  to  saddle  the  horse  and  accompany  his 
master  if  he  wants  to  go  out ;  for  people  riding 
short  distances,  that  is  to  say,  about  stations, 
&c.,  always  take  their  syces  with  them  to  hold 
their  horses  while  they  are  dismounted. 

There  is  one  peculiarity  about  syces  in  Bengal, 
which  is  that  when  out  at  exercise  they  never 
ride  but  always  lead  the  horses.  In  Madras  and 
Bombay  they  ride  much  more. 

If  you  wish  to  have  decent  milk  and  butter  it 
is  essential  to  keep  cows,  for  it  is  impossible  to 
buy  good  butter  in  the  bazaars,  and  very  hard  to 
get  good  milk.  It  is  not,  as  a  rule,  difficult 
to  get  cows  of  some  sort  or  another,  though  you 
may  not  be  able  to  pick  up  at  once  just  what  you 
would  wish. 

A  cow  is  said  to  give  so  many  seers  of  milk  a 
day,  the  seer  being  almost  the  exact  equivalent 
of  a  quart.  The  generality  of  them  only  yield 
about  five  seers  a  day,  and  though  they  differ  in 
this  respect,  it  is  a  very  first-rate  one  that  gives 


 o7 

as  much  as  ten  seers.  They  are  naturally  not 
nearly  so  expensive  as  cows  in  England,  and  the 
usual  price  is  about  five  or  six  rupees  per  seer ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  price  of  a  cow  which  gives  six 
seers  of  milk  will  be  from  thirty  to  thirty-six 
rupees.  For  an  extraordinarily  good  animal  the 
rate  I  have  mentioned  would  probably  be  raised, 
and  one  giving  ten  seers  of  milk  would  fetch 
seventy  or  eighty  rupees.  It  is  only  right  that 
this  should  be  so,  for,  after  all,  the  great  expense 
of  the  cow  is  its  keep,  and  a  bad  one  eats  just 
as  much  as  a  good  one  does.  If  you  keep  cows 
there  must  be  a  man  to  look  after  them,  and  he 
is  called  a  gowalla. 

Most  people  keep  a  few  goats,  also,  for  the 
sake  of  their  milk,  which  is  drunk  quite  fresh 
with  tea  instead  of  cream ;  and  I  know  few 
better  things  than  a  cup  of  really  good  Indian 
hill  tea,  with  milk  just  drawn  from  the  goat 
poured  foaming  into  it. 

Then  there  is  the  garden  to  be  attended  to. 
Every  compound  has  a  garden  of  some  sort 

5  * 


68  

in  it,  and  to  say  nothing  of  maintaining  the 
neatness  of  the  place,  and  the  pleasure  of 
having  the  flowers,  it  is  essential  to  keep  up 
a  garden  for  the  sake  of  the  vegetables.  The 
gardeners  are  called  mails ;  and  though  some 
of  them — owing  to  the  instructions  they  have 
received  from  their  masters — are  better  than 
others,  it  is  not  easy  to  get  a  man  who  really 
knows  much  of  his  business.  In  the  plains 
the  great  time  for  the  garden  is  during  the 
cold  weather,  for  in  the  hot  weather  everything 
is  dried  up,  and  this  period  really  corresponds 
to  the  winter  in  England.  You  can  produce 
almost  any  sort  of  vegetable ;  and  while  some 
of  them,  with  care,  can  be  grown  just  as  good 
as  in  England,  it  seems  impossible  to  get  the 
proper  flavour  into  others.  Celery,  beetroot, 
lettuces,  radishes,  onions,  cabbages,  cauliflowers, 
and  turnips,  are  all  that  can  be  desired ;  while 
though  you  may  grow  carrots,  peas,  French 
beans,  or  broad  beans,  they  never  taste  as  they 
Ought  to  do.  Potatoes  can  be  grown  in  the 


 69 

plains,  but  they  do  much  better  in  the  hills, 
and  those  raised  there  are  as  fine  as  anyone 
can  wish  for. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  an  Indian 
garden  can  compare  with  an  English  one.  It 
is  true  that  you  have  plants,  which  can  only 
be  reared  in  hot-houses  in  England,  growing 
almost  as  bushes  in  the  open  air  in  India — 
such,  for  instance,  are  the  gardenia,  poinsettia, 
and  bougainvillia — but  the  absence  of  the  smooth 
green  turf  and  the  evergreens  which  are  always 
such  beautiful  features  in  an  English  garden 
is  a  serious  drawback,  and  cannot  in  my  opinion 
be  made  up  for  in  other  ways.  Some  of  the 
public  gardens,  such  as  those  in  Calcutta, 
Lucknow,  Allahabad,  Agra,  and  Umritsur,  are 
beautifully  kept  up,  and  have  large  sums  of 
money  spent  on  them ;  but  I  cannot  help  think- 
ing that  owing  to  the  difference  in  gardens 
and  climate,  a  similar  outlay  would  produce 
better  results  in  England.  Roses  do  very  well 
in  India,  and  during  the  cold  weather  there  is 


70  

always  a   magnificent  show   to  be    seen  in  the 
Taj 'gardens  at  Agra. 

The  fruit  is  not  to  be  compared  to  that 
in  England.  Peaches  are  tolerably  good. 
Grapes  are  grown  on  vineries  made  of  rows 
of  brick  pillars  with  wooden  framework  laid  on 
them  to  support  the  trees ;  but  the  fruit  pro- 
duced is  only  like  that  grown  on  walls  in 
England,  and  very  much  inferior  to  hot-house 
grapes.  Apples,  pears,  currants,  raspberries, 
gooseberries,  &c.  do  not  grow  at  all  in  the  plains, 
but  I  have  seen  fine  pears  and  apples  grown  from 
English  stocks  in  the  hills ;  while  in  a  few 
instances  people  who  have  been  settled  in  the 
Himalayas  for  some  years,  cultivate  their  Eng- 
lish fruit  with  very  tolerable  success.  Mangoes 
yield  the  chief  fruit-harvest  of  India,  and  are 
very  nice  for  a  time,  but  1  think  one  soon 
gets  tired  of  them,  and  the  melons  which  grow 
profusely  in  the  hot  weather  are  by  no  means 
bad.  Cashmere  is  the  best  place  in  India  for 
fruit,  and  just  outside  our  frontier  the  Afghans 


 71 

are  very  successful  in  their  gardening.  At 
Cabul  I  have  seen  beautiful  grapes  of  various 
sorts,  peaches,  apricots,  cherries,  apples,  and 
pears,  the  fact  being  that  these  fruits  do  better 
in  the  more  temperate  climate. 

I  have  spoken  about  the  stable- servants  who 
will  be  required,  but  I  have  as  yet  said  nothing 
about  the  horses  that  are  to  be  got  in  the 
country.  English  horses  are  very  rare,  and 
only  to  be  found  when  they  have  been  taken 
out  by  people  for  their  own  special  use.  Those 
that  can  generally  be  purchased  are  of  three 
descriptions,  viz.  Arabs,  which  are  mostly  landed 
at  Bombay  and  thence  distributed  up  country ; 
Australians,  generally  called  "  Walers,"  because 
they  come  from  New  South  Wales ;  and  "country- 
breds,"  or  the  horses  bred  in  India.  There  is 
no  doubt  that  a  really  fine  Arab  is  a  very 
pleasant  horse  to  ride.  As  a  rule  they  are 
first-rate  in  their  canter  and  gallop,  but  it  is 
very  difficult  to  find  one  that  trots  well,  and 
generally  difficult  to  find  one  that  walks  well. 


72  

If  you  can  secure  one  that  is  good  in  all  his 
paces,  no  horse  is  better  suited  for  India  than 
the  Arab. 

The  "Waler"  is  altogether  much  more  like 
the  English  horse  (and  naturally  so  as  he  is  bred 
from  English  stock)  both  in  make,  shape,  and 
paces.  They,  too,  very  often  fail  in  that  most 
essential  quality  of  walking  well,  and  chiefly, 
I  fancy,  because  they  have  never  had  any  ex- 
perience of  the  deep  heavy  ground  there  is  in 
England,  which  compels  a  horse  to  pick  up 
his  feet  and  bend  his  knees.  Formerly  it  was 
very  difficult  to  get  quiet  "  Walers."  Many  of 
them  were  given  to  buck-jumping,  a  habit  con- 
tracted, I  daresay,  because,  from  the  large  number 
of  animals  to  be  broken  in  Australia  and  the 
very  few  rough-riders  to  do  it,  the  latter  could 
not  afford  to  give  the  time  and  attention  neces- 
sary to  break  a  young  horse  well  and  carefully. 
There  is  a  great  improvement  in  this  respect, 
and  many  of  the  horses  landed  at  Calcutta  from 
Australia  are  perfectly  well  broken,  and  very 


 73 

fine  animals  into  the  bargain.  I  cannot  say 
that  I  am  very  fond  of  the  "  country-bred " 
myself.  They  are,  of  course,  a  great  deal  used, 
and  especially  for  harness,  as  they  are  by  far 
the  cheapest  horses  in  the  country,  but  it  is 
very  seldom  that  they  fail  to  betray  their  origin 
in  some  way  sooner  or  later.  You  may  be 
riding  or  driving  along  quietly,  when  your  horse 
suddenly  stands  stock-still  and  refuses  to  move* 
If  you  try  to  get  him  forward,  up  he  goes 
straight  on  end.  It  simply  arises  from  a  bit 
of  hereditary  sulkiness  or  obstinacy,  and  may 
fairly  be  called  "  the  mark  of  the  beast." 
However,  in  purchasing  horses,  as  in  everything 
else,  the  new  comer  will  have  to  be  guided  by 
his  tastes,  wants,  and,  last  but  not  least,  by 
his  means.  India  is  like  most  other  countries* 
it  has  no  lack  of  good  horses  for  those  who 
are  able  to  pay  for  them.  Most  people  going 
out  take  a  saddle  and  some  bridles  with  them, 
but  there  are  frequent  opportunities  for  buying 
such  things,  when  necessary,  from  those  who 


74  

have  more  than  they  want,   or  are  leaving  the 
country. 

The  new  arrival  is  now  supposed  to  be  settled 
down  in  his  bungalow,  servants  engaged,  horses, 
&c.  bought,  and  his  whole  establishment  in 
working  order,  so  we  may  now  look  at  what  life 
in  a  plains'  station  generally  is  through  the  year. 
We  will  suppose  the  time  to  be  towards  the  end 
of  October,  when  the  hot  weather  is  pretty  well 
over,  and  the  climate  becoming  pleasanter  every 
day.  Punkahs  are  being  taken  down  and  put 
away,  and  people  are  preparing  to  spend  a 
pleasant  six  months,  for  there  is  no  doubt  that 
the  cold  weather  in  India  is  enjoyable  enough. 
During  the  summer  there  is  not  only  the  heat 
to  be  borne,  but  life  in  the  plains  is  very  dull, 
because  all  who  can  do  so  escape  to  the  hill 
stations  ;  but  in  the  winter  almost  all  the  houses 
are  occupied,  people  are  constantly  meeting  each 
other,  and  there  are  lawn  tennis  or  afternoon 
parties  of  some  sort  every  day.  Dinner  parties, 


 75 

picnics,  and  dances,  too,  are  not  infrequent,  and 
life  passes  away  pleasantly  enough.  Shooting 
begins  now,  and  though  I  do  not  wish  to  write 
much  on  a  subject  which  easily  might  and  often 
has  filled  volumes,  I  would  just  say  sufficient  to 
indicate  the  seasons  for  the  different  sorts  of 
game.  For  instance,  the  autumn  is  not  the  time 
for  big  game  shooting.  The  rains  have  only 
lately  ceased,  and  owing  to  them  and  the  hot- 
house heat,  the  heavy  jungles  where  tigers,  &c.  are 
to  be  found  have  become  so  dense  that  it  would 
be  impossible  to  beat  them.  I  have  been  shooting 
in  December  from  an  elephant's  back  in  the 
Terai,  which  runs  under  the  Himalayas,  where 
the  grass  was  over  my  head  as  I  was  standing 
up,  and  this  would  make  it  from  sixteen  to 
seventeen  feet  high.  Besides  this,  the  jungles 
are  so  feverish  and  unhealthy  after  the  rains, 
that  they  can  really  only  be  called  deadly  until 
the  dampness  has  dried  up  and  they  are  once 
more  safe  to  sleep  in,  which  is  hardly  before 
December.  But  snipe  and  duck  are  beginning 


76  

to  come  down  from  the  north  in  October,  and 
towards  the  end  of  that  month  very  good  sport 
can  be  got,  which  goes  on  improving  till  the 
following  spring,  when  the  birds  disappear  with 
the  increasing  heat. 

There  are  marshes,  or  jheels,  as  they  are 
called,  which  can  be  reached  from  most  stations, 
and  as  a  rule  they  afford  first-rate  sport.  It  is 
wonderful  how  soon  one  gets  rid  of  two  or  three 
hundred  cartridges,  and  thirty  or  forty  couple  of 
snipe  is  no  unusual  bag  for  one  gun.  Besides 
these,  there  are  various  kinds  of  partridge  to  be 
got,  but  they  are  terrible  birds  to  run,  and  their 
flavour  is  so  indifferent  that  they  are  hardly 
worth  eating  when  killed.  There  are  generally 
two  or  three  hares  to  be  seen  in  a  day's  shoot- 
ing, but  rabbits  do  not  exist  at  all  in  India, 
Then,  for  those  who  like  deer- stalking,  there  are 
very  often  antelope,  or,  as  they  are  called,  black 
buck,  to  be  got  within  a  ride,  and,  in  fact,  the 
real  sportsman  will  hardly  ever  be  at  a  loss 
for  amusement.  As  the  spring  comes  on,  and 


 77 

the  burning  sun  dries  up  the  grass,  the  time  for 
tiger- shooting  approaches.  I  am  speaking  now 
more  particularly  of  the  Terai,  which  stretches 
away  in  a  belt  for  many  miles  along  the  base  of 
the  Himalayas.  Here,  when  the  grass  is  suffi- 
ciently dry,  the  cowherds  set  fire  to  it,  and  over 
the  burnt-up  remains  the  young  grass  springs 
up,  on  which  their  cattle  feed.  There  are  left 
here  and  there  patches  of  grass,  which  are  gene- 
rally full  of  deer  of  different  sorts,  while  an  occa- 
sional tiger  may  be  found  in  the  heavier  coverts, 
through  which,  perhaps,  a  stream  passes. 

I  know  few  things  more  delightful  in  the  shoot- 
ing line  than  to  be  out  in  the  jungle  about  the 
end  of  March,  with  four  or  five  pleasant  compa- 
nions and  about  five-and-twenty  elephants.  You 
get  into  the  howdah  after  breakfast,  shoot  all 
day,  stopping  for  luncheon,  and  either  return  in 
the  evening  to  the  camp  from  which  you  started, 
or  find  it  moved  to  some  fresh  spot,  whence  on 
the  morrow  you  will  beat  new  ground.  The 
sport,  the  scenery,  and  the  complete  absence  of 


78  

all  official  work  and  cares,  combine  to  make  the 
holiday  perfect,  and  there  is  nothing  but  regret 
when  the  trip  is  over  and  the  camp  has  to  be 
abandoned  for  the  station.  The  only  thing 
against  this  mode  of  shooting  is  its  expense. 
Elephants  are  costly  animals  to  feed,  and  a 
party  going  out  on  a  sporting  trip  always  takes 
care  to  live  pretty  comfortably ;  the  result  pro- 
bably being  rather  a  high  bill  at  the  end  of  the 
expedition. 

Tiger- shooting  is  not  what  it  used  to  be,  at 
any  rate  in  our  Terai.  Cultivation  has  increased 
so  much,  that  the  jungles  are  considerably 
diminished  in  extent,  and  tigers  are  not  so 
numerous  as  they  were.  The  way  to  see  tiger- 
shooting  from  elephants  in  perfection,  is  to  get 
an  invitation  to  join  some  party  going  into  the 
Nepal  Terai.  There  the  jungles  still  exist  in  all 
their  primeval  grandeur,  and  you  may  almost  say 
that  tigers  are  preserved.  No  party  ever  goes, 
there  without  killing  several,  while  in  our  own 
districts  you  may  beat  for  days  and  kill  only 


 79 

one  or  two,  or,  perhaps,  none.  I  am  not  at  all 
arguing  that  jungles  or  tigers  should  be  main- 
tained for  sport ;  I  am  only  saying  what  is  the 
actual  state  of  the  case. 

Tiger-shooting  is  carried  on  without  elephants 
in  a  great  many  parts  of  India,  and  the  regiment 
known  as  the  Central  India  Horse,  for  instance, 
organise  shooting-parties,  which,  I  think,  go  on 
through  May  and  June,  where  elephants  are 
hardly  used  at  all.  On  one  point  there  can  be 
no  doubt,  which  is  that  India  is  the  country  for 
a  man  who  is  fond  of  shooting,  and  who  has  no 
friend  to  give  it  him  in  England. 

It  might,  perhaps,  be  useful  to  say  here  a  few 
words  regarding  the  weapons  which  anyone 
intending  to  shoot  should  take  out  with  him, 
and  my  first  advice  on  this  head  is  not  to  be  in 
a  hurry.  Let  everyone  take  out  what  he  has,  but 
unless  the  sportsman  is  a  person  in  easy  circum- 
stances, and  only  going  to  India  for  a  sporting 
trip,  I  think  he  would  do  well  to  wait  till  he  gets 
out  and  has  time  to  see  what  he  will  want.  It 


80  

may  be  that  he  will  find  himself  in  a  station  near 
which  there  is  no  game  for  a  rifle,  and  his  duties 
may  be  such  that  he  will  for  a  time  be  unable 
to  get  away  on  leave.  Then,  different  sorts  of 
rifles  are  required  for  different  sorts  of  game. 
For  black  buck  shooting,  there  is  nothing  like 
the  express,  while  for  howdah  shooting  or  jungle 
shooting,  where  game  passes  rapidly  and  close  to 
you,  people  differ  in  their  opinions  as  to  what  is 
the  best  style  of  rifle  to  have.  Myself,  shooting 
from  the  howdah,  I  prefer  a  double-barrelled 
snider-bore  to  anything.  You  can  buy  as  many 
of  the  cartridges,  all  ready  made  up,  from  the 
Government  magazines  as  you  choose ;  the  bullet 
inflicts  a  frightful  wound,  and  the  charge  of 
powder  being  comparatively  small,  there  is  not 
the  jar  which  is  experienced  in  firing  the  Express 
or  12-bore,  which  take  four  or  five  drams  of 
powder. 

People  may  fancy  that  in  large  game  shooting 
you  do  not  get  many  shots  in  the  course  of  the 
day ;  but  when  the  jungle  is  burnt,  the  patches 


 81 

which  are  left  are  often  full  of  deer,  and  at  cer- 
tain times  you  are  blazing  away  as  fast  as  you 
can  load.  I  remember  on  one  occasion  firing 
away  one  hundred  and  thirty  cartridges  loaded 
with  four  and  a  half  drams  of  powder  in  the 
course  of  the  day,  the  result  being  that  at  the 
end  I  felt  as  though  my  head  would  burst,  and 
had  the  most  frightful  headache. 

There  is  another  thing  to  be  borne  in  mind. 
As  in  the  case  of  saddlery  and  harness,  either 
because  they  are  going  to  England,  or  for  some 
other  reason,  people  are  constantly  selling  their 
guns  and  rifles,  and  any  sportsman  wishing  to  fit 
himself  out  will  find  advertisements  every  day  in 
the  local  papers  from  which  to  choose,  and  if  he 
looks  out  he  will  probably  be  able  to  get  the 
style  of  weapon  he  wants,  perfectly  good  and 
much  cheaper  than  if  he  had  bought  it  new  in 
London. 

Besides  game-shooting,  there  is  no  lack  of 
amusement  for  the  target-shot.  Every  presidency 
has  its  rifle  association,  and  as  the  meetings 

6 


82  

are  held  at  different  seasons  of  the  year, 
anyone  who  is  keen  on  the  subject  can  attend 
them  all,  if  he  can  only  command  the  necessary 
leisure. 

The  cold  weather,  also,  is  the  time  for  hunting. 
This  cannot  in  any  way  be  compared  with  that 
in  England.  At  some  few  places  draft  fox- 
hounds or  harriers  are  got  out  from  England, 
and  packs  organised ;  but  there  is  a  great  deal 
against  hunting.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  no 
animal  to  hunt  like  the  fox.  The  jackal  has  to 
take  his  place,  but  he  is  not  the  same  thing 
either  for  pluck  or  endurance.  Then  scent  is 
a  great  difficulty.  The  only  way  to  secure  any 
at  all,  is  to  commence  hunting  as  soon  it  is  day- 
light ;  for  directly  the  sun  gets  up,  the  scent  dis- 
appears entirely,  and  it  is  hopeless  to  try  and  get 
any.  Peshawar  has  always  been  considered  the 
best  place,  at  any  rate  in  Upper  India,  for  hunt- 
ing, partly,  I  suppose,  because  from  its  northern 
latitude  it  has  the  longest  and  the  coldest 
winter,  and  perhaps,  also,  the  valley  in  which  it 


 83 

lies  may  be  somewhat  damper,  and  consequently 
retains  scent  better  than  other  places. 

Another  thing  which  causes  some  trouble  and 
expense  is  that  the  hounds  must  always  be  sent 
up  to  the  hills  in  the  hot  weather,  or  they  would 
inevitably  die.  The  country  too,  is  not  the 
same  thing  to  ride  over  as  in  England.  There 
are,  properly  speaking,  hardly  any  fences,'  the 
only  obstacles  as  a  rule  being  ditches,  with, 
perhaps,  a  mud  wall  here  and  there.  I  think  the 
most  popular  sport  in  India  in  the  hunting  line, 
if  it  can  so  be  called,  is  pig-sticking ;  but  there 
are  not  many  places  from  which  this  can  be 
got. 

I  will  not  enter  into  any  detail  of  how  pig- 
sticking is  managed,  because  it  is  not  my  object 
to  write  an  essay  on  sport,  but  to  give  a  general 
idea  of  life  in  India  throughout  the  year. 

For  fisbing  the  country  is,  I  should  say, 
decidedly  badly  off.  There  are  rivers  where 
mahseer  can  be  caught,  and  very  large  ones  too, 
but  it  is  not  easy  to  get  them  to  take  a  fly,  and 


84  

the  usual  method  is  spoon  bait  or  artificial  bait 
of  some  sort.  They  run  up  to  a  very  consider- 
able size,  and  fight  well  when  hooked,  but  if 
over  six  or  seven  pounds  in  weight  they  are  very 
coarse  for  eating.  Personally,  I  do  not  think 
any  of  the  fresh-water  fish  in  India  worth  any- 
thing for  the  table.  They  are  all  very  bony  and 
tasteless,  the  consequence  being  that  when  people 
give  dinner-parties  they  almost  always  use 
tinned  English  fish.  Down  in  the  Central  Pro- 
vinces there  are  what  they  call  trout,  but  they 
share  the  peculiarity  of  their  Indian  brethren  in 
being  bony  and  comparatively  tasteless.  The 
fresh-water  fish  mostly  used  for  the  table  are 
called  ruh,  but  they  are  entirely  taken  with  the 
net.  Altogether,  fish  is  a  great  want  in  India, 
certainly  for  sport,  but  more  especially  for  food. 
As  regards  salt-water  fish,  the  hilsa  at  Calcutta 
and  the  pomfret  or  pomphlet  at  Bombay  are  very 
good,  but  there  is  nothing  like  the  variety  that 
we  have  in  England. 

Anyone  who  cares  about   hawking  can   have 


LIFE    IN   INDIA.  85 

ample  opportunity  for  practising  it.  In  almost 
every  city  there  are  two  or  three  men  who  are 
accustomed  to  it,  and  train  hawks,  while  the 
birds  themselves  abound  all  over  the  country. 

I  do  not  think  I  need  say  anything  more 
about  sport  properly  so  called,  but  may  return  to 
life  in  the  station  and  the  amusements  there. 

Cricket  is  hardly  played  at  all  except  during 
the  cold  weather,  but  wherever  there  are  English- 
men you  will  find  the  national  game,  and 
matches  are  frequent  throughout  the  winter. 
One  of  the  most  popular  games  is  polo,  and 
India  gives  unusual  facilities  for  this.  As  I  have 
said,  riding  there  is  not  a  luxury,  but  a  necessity. 
Everyone  keeps  a  pony  or  two,  and  conse- 
quently can,  if  he  likes,  easily  fit  himself  out  for 
polo.  Then,  again,  the  country  abounds  with 
ponies,  most  of  which  can  be  got  at  moderate 
prices,  instead  of  costing  the  fabulous  sums  that 
are  given  for  really  good  polo  ponies  in  England, 
so  that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  anyone  who 
likes  it  from  taking  part  in  the  game.  Almost 


86  

every  station  has  one  or  more  racquet  courts, 
which  are  chiefly  used  during  the  hot  weather, 
as  this  is  much  the  most  suitable  time  for  play- 
ing. They  differ  from  those  in  England  in  that 
they  are  almost  always  open  or  uncovered  courts, 
while  the  balls  used  in  play  are  black  instead  of 
being  white.  Lawn  tennis  is  a  game  which  has 
become  exceedingly  popular  in  India,  and  is 
wonderfully  well  adapted  to  the  country.  The 
compounds  surrounding  houses  give  ample  space 
for  courts,  which  are  almost  always  of  mud.  Turf 
grows  so  badly  and  is  so  difficult  to  keep  in 
proper  order,  that  much  the  simplest  plan  is  to 
have  the  coarse  grass  peeled  off,  and  the  ground 
then  watered,  hammered,  and  rolled,  when  it 
gives  as  good  a  surface  for  lawn  tennis  as  could 
possibly  be  desired. 

And  so  life  goes  on  in  the  Indian  station.  To 
the  civilians,  in  some  ways,  the  season  of  the 
year  does  not  make  very  much  difference,  for  he 
always  has  his  hands  pretty  full  in  doing  his 


 87 

magisterial  work,  the  only  difference  being  that 
in  the  summer  he  commences  about  6  A.M., 
closing  his  court  at  noon,  while  in  the  winter  he 
begins  at  about  11  A.M.  and  ends  at  6  P.M. 
During  the  cold  weather,  all  the  civilians  except 
the  judges  are  a  great  deal  out  in  camp,  as  their 
districts  have  to  be  visited,  revenue  collected, 
and  many  things  attended  to  which  could  not 
possibly  be  done  without  personal  supervision. 
I  suppose  the  world  does  not  contain  a  body  of 
men  who  work  harder  than  the  Indian  civilians 
do.  They  are  highly  paid,  but  not  more  highly 
than  they  deserve,  and  considering  what  they 
have  to  go  through  to  get  their  posts,  and  the 
amount  of  work  expected  from  them  when  ap- 
pointed, it  is  only  right  that  they  should  be 
well  paid. 

India  has  a  precedence  list  of  its  own,  accord- 
ing to  which  civilians  rank  very  much  higher 
than  the  military.  For  instance,  a  civilian,  by 
which  I  mean  a  member  of  the  Indian  Civil 
Service,  ranks  with  a  captain,  who,  by  the  Staff 


88  

Corps  rules,  cannot  attain  that  position  under 
twelve  years'  service  ;  a  civilian  of  eight  years' 
service  with  a  major  who  has  twenty  ;  and  a 
civilian  of  twelve  with  a  lieutenant-colonel  who  has 
twenty-six  years'  service.  Eank,  which  would  take 
precedence  in  England,  is  of  no  account  whatever 
in  India;  and  this,  no  doubt,  is  right  enough,  but 
I  do  not  quite  see  why  the  civilians  should  be 
placed  so  far  above  the  military,  who  are  really 
the  people  that  hold  the  country.  Sweep  the 
former  away,  and  amongst  the  latter  you  could 
find  men  to  carry  on  the  business  of  the  Empire, 
for  many  of  the  most  eminent  Indian  admini- 
strators have  been  soldiers ;  but  take  away  the 
army,  and  where  would  the  civilians  be  ? 

There  is  a  sort  of  idea  amongst  people,  or  at 
any  rate  some  people,  in  England,  that  society  in 
India  is  of  the  most  indifferent  sort,  that  very 
queer  things  go  on  there,  and  that  altogether  it 
is  quite  below  the  level  of  that  in  England.  A 
greater  mistake  there  could  not  be.  Indian 
society  contains  as  pleasant  and  well-informed 


LIFE    IK    INDIA.  89 

people  as  any  other  does,  while,  as  for  kindli- 
ness and  hospitality,  I  defy  the  world  to  beat  it. 
In  the  Indian  Civil  Service  there  are  many  men 
of  remarkable  power  and  ability ;  while  as  far 
as  the  army  is  concerned,  India  will  compare 
favourably  with  any  part  of  the  British  posses- 
sions, for  it  is  par  excellence  the  country  for 
soldiering.  As  regards  morality  generally,  I  do 
not  mean  to  say  that  India  is  blameless,  and  I 
should  like  to  be  shown  the  country  that  is ; 
but  I  suspect  it  would  compare  favourably  with 
England. 

I  need  hardly  say  that  the  postal  and  tele- 
graph services  are  well  carried  out  all  over 
the  country.  There  is  scarcely  a  station,  how- 
ever small,  that  is  without  its  telegraph  office, 
and  the  uniform  rate  for  telegraphing,  all  over 
India,  is  one  rupee  for  six  words,  not  including 
the  address.  The  various  stations,  too,  are  as 
a  rule  very  well  off  for  churches.  Almost  all 
of  them  have  good  and  large  ones,  while  some 
of  them  are  remarkably  fine  buildings.  Those 


90  

at  Umballa,  Meean  Meer,  and  Peshawar  are, 
I  should  say,  specially  worthy  of  remark,  while 
some  have  been  built  as  memorials  of  the 
Mutiny,  as  at  Futtehgurh  and  Cawnpore,  which 
would  be  considered  fine  churches  anywhere. 
The  services  are  suited  to  the  climate,  and  not 
so  long  as  those  in  England ;  for  instance, 
Morning  Prayer  and  the  Litany  are  never  given 
at  the  same  service,  but  are  generally  read  on 
alternate  Sundays.  The  singing,  as  a  rule,  is 
not  quite  worthy  of  the  churches ;  but  there 
are  great  difficulties  about  this.  There  is  rarely 
anything  but  a  harmonium,  and  even  where 
there  is  an  organ  it  is  often  difficult  to  find 
anyone  to  play  it.  Then  there  is  no  supply 
of  boys  to  fill  up  the  choir  as  there  is  in 
England,  and  when  a  clergyman  has  to  depend 
solely  on  amateurs  the  outlook  for  his  choir 
is  not  a  very  good  one.  If  the  material  were 
available,  I  do  not  think  there  would  be  any 
difficulty  about  raising  the  money  to  pay  for  it, 
as  there  are  collections  after  every  service, 


 91 

while  people  are  in  easier  circumstances  and 
more  beyond  that  constant  feeling  of  want  of 
money  which  is  so  common  in  England,  and  so 
depressing  to  those  who  suffer  from  it.  One 
peculiarity  about  the  country  is  that  people 
hardly  ever  carry  money  in  their  pockets  except 
when  travelling,  and  this  difficulty  is  met  in 
church  by  sending  round  in  the  plates  packets 
of  cards  on  which  donors  write  down  what 
they  wish  to  give.  The  cards  are  then  taken 
to  the  various  houses  during  the  week,  and 
the  donations  written  on  them  are  paid  up. 

There  is  another  story  told  of  Bishop  Wilson 
on  this  very  subject.  He  was  preaching  in 
the  Cathedral  at  Calcutta,  and  in  the  course 
of  his  sermon  commented  on  the  difficulty  there 
very  often  was  in  collecting  the  sums  which  had 
been  written  down  on  the  cards.  He  said : 
"When  the  chuprassies  [servants  employed  on 
messenger  work]  go  to  your  houses,  some  say 
'  Ktd  ao '  [Come  to-morrow] ;  and  some  say 
*  Larson  ao '  [Come  the  day  after  to-morrow] ; 


92  

and  some — oh !  the  wickedness  of  this  world — 
say  'Jehannum  ko  jao."  When  I  say  that  jao 
means  "  go,"  ko  "  to,"  and  that  Jehannum  cor- 
responds to  Gehenna,  I  do  not  think  that  I 
need  explain  any  further  what  the  worthy  bishop 
complained  of. 

The  spiritual  wants  of  the  European  com- 
munity are  attended  to  by  five  bishops,  five 
archdeacons,  ninety  Church  of  England  chap- 
lains in  Bengal,  and,  I  think,  about  forty  each 
in  the  Madras  and  Bombay  Presidencies.  Besides 
these,  there  are  Roman  Catholic  and  Presby- 
terian chaplains.  Formerly  there  were  only 
three  bishoprics,  viz.  Calcutta,  Madras,  and 
Bombay,  but  these  have  been  lately  increased 
by  two  more,  Lahore  and  Burmah ;  and  it  was 
not  before  they  were  wanted,  for  it  must  always 
have  been  a  mystery  how  the  Bishop  of  Calcutta, 
for  instance,  get  through  his  work.  I  have 
frequently  rather  wondered  why  Church  of  Eng- 
land chaplaincies  in  India  are  not  more  sought 
after,  for  as  a  rule  the  work  is  very  light  com- 


 93 

pared  to   an   English  living  or  curacy,  and  the 
pay  by  no  means  bad. 

The  clergy  are  divided  into  two  classes ;  junior 
and  senior  chaplains.  The  former  receive  five 
hundred  rupees  per  mensem  till  they  have  com- 
pleted ten  years'  service,  when  they  are  raised  to 
eight  hundred  rupees  per  mensem,  and  this  does 
not  include  any  time  spent  on  furlough.  After  a 
total  service  of  seventeen  years,  which  must  be  ex- 
clusive of  furlough,  the  chaplain  can,  if  he  pleases, 
retire  to  England  on  a  pension  of  one  pound 
a  day  for  the  rest  of  his  life  ;  not  a  bad  addition 
to  any  other  employment  he  may  be  able  to 
obtain  there.  Or  he  can,  if  he  pleases,  hold 
on  till  he  has  completed  twenty-five  years'  service, 
when  he  is  obliged  to  retire  on  the  pension  I 
have  mentioned.  His  work  in  India  is  not 
hard,  and  there  is  none  of  the  visiting  in 
slums  which  has  to  be  gone  through  in  the 
towns  of  England.  The  poor  part,  so  to  say, 
of  his  congregation  is  almost  entirely  composed 
of  British  soldiers  and  a  few  pensioners,  the 


94  

former  of  whom  he  has  to  visit  in  barracks  and 
hospitals,  the  latter  in  their  own  homes  ;  while 
if  he  is  not  at  all  times  a  welcome  guest  in 
pleasant  society  it  is  his  own  fault. 

Besides  the  advantages  I  have  mentioned, 
every  chaplain,  if  he  wishes  it,  is  pretty  sure 
of  at  least  two  tours  of  duty  at  a  hill  station, 
each  tour  lasting  two  years,  while  there  are 
always  the  archdeaconries  as  prizes  to  be  ob- 
tained, with  much  higher  pay  and  retiring 
pensions  than  the  chaplaincies,  though  the  five 
are  not  all  on  quite  the  same  scale. 

The  clergy  are  paid  for  out  of  the  Govern- 
ment revenues  on  the  ground  that  they  are 
required  for  the  soldiers,  and  they  consequently 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  natives.  These 
are  entirely  attended  to  by  missionaries  of 
various  nationalities,  of  whom  I  think  I  am 
justified  in  saying  that  by  far  the  larger  pro- 
portion are  American  Dissenters,  who  are  also 
trained  as  doctors,  and  thus  combine  the  cure 
of  the  body  with  that  of  the  soul.  To  say 


 95 

that  they  are  thoroughly  earnest,  hard-working 
men,  does  not  give  much  idea  of  all  they  go 
through  in  the  profession  they  have  adopted  ; 
but  as  far  as  conversions  go,  I  fear  they  are 
not  very  successful.  Such  firmly  established 
religions  as  Mohammedanism  and  Hindooism 
are  not  easily  upset,  but  at  any  rate  the 
missionaries  of  all  nations  have  done  a  vast 
deal  of  good  by  the  education  they  have  diffused 
through  the  country,  and  this,  I  think,  is  the 
object  they  chiefly  aim  at. 

To  those  who  are  fond  of  the  stage  India 
is  certainly  disappointing,  for  there  is  little  to 
be  seen  there  in  the  way  of  professional  theatri- 
cals. There  are  generally  companies  in  the 
presidency  towns  during  the  cold  weather,  and 
some  of  them  occasionally  take  trips  round  to 
various  stations,  but  I  am  afraid  these  journeys 
do  not  as  a  rule  pay  very  well.  There  have 
been  opera  companies  occasionally  at  Calcutta 
in  the  winter,  but,  I  suppose,  owing  to  the  in- 
creased cost  of  living,  and  the  loss  by  exchange 


96  

to  which  I  have  referred,  it  is  found  to  be  more 
and  more  difficult  to  raise  the  necessary  sub- 
scriptions to  keep  them  afloat,  and  I  do  not 
think  there  has  been  any  opera  for  some  seasons 
past  now. 

As  the  winter  passes  by  and  April  draws  near, 
the  increasing  heat  tells  of  the  approaching 
migration  to  the  hills,  when  their  season  com- 
mences, and  plains'  stations  lead  a  life  of  dreary 
quietude  till  the  heat  once  more  disappears. 
For  the  military  part  of  society  the  leave-season 
is  from  the  15th  April  till  the  15th .  October, 
and  between  these  dates  most  officers  take  it 
in  turns  to  leave  their  regiments  and  go  to 
the  hills,  while  some  people,  both  military  and 
civilian,  hold  appointments  which  take  them  up 
there  for  the  whole  of  the  hot  weather.  Others, 
again,  go  for  six  months  to  Cashmere,  and  there 
are  few  pleasanter  ways  of  spending  the  summer; 
in  a  splendid  climate,  amidst  magnificent  scenery, 
and  with,  generally  speaking,  good  shooting. 
Another  thing  which  recommends  Cashmere  to 


 97 

many  officers  is,  that  while  there  they  draw  pay 
at  the   Indian  rate.     If  they  took  six  months' 
leave  to  England,  not  only  would  there  be  the 
expense   of    the   passage   home   and   back,    but 
while    away    they   would   only   receive   English 
pay.     The   official   reason  for   this    is    that   in 
Cashmere  the  officer  is  actually  in  India,   and, 
therefore,  can  easily  be  recalled  if  required.     But 
as  a  matter  of  fact  the   probabilities   are   that 
he  could   rejoin   more   speedily    from   England. 
A  telegram   to  any  address  there    would  bring 
him   out  in  three    weeks ;    while    a   letter  sent 
into  Cashmere  (for  there  is  no  telegraph  beyond 
our  own  territory)  might  not  find   him  for  weeks 
if  he  were  somewhere  out  in  the  wilds  shooting, 
and  under  any  circumstances  he  would  hardly 
be  likely  to  rejoin  under  a  month. 

Those  who  are  not  fortunate  enough  to  get 
away  make  preparations  for  resisting  the  heat  as 
well  as  they  can,  and|the  first  thing  to  do  is  to 
have  the  punkahs  put  up  ready  for  use  as  soon  as 
the  thermometer  rises  to  84°  or  85°.  Without 

7 


98  

these  life  would  be  unendurable.  They  keep  one 
cool,  keep  off  the  flies,  and,  in  fact,  under  the 
punkah  is  the  only  comfortable  place  in  the  hot 
weather.  Without  them,  too,  it  would  be  abso- 
lutely impossible  to  sleep. 

Another  means  of  lowering  the  temperature 
usually  adopted  is  by  having  tatties  or  screens  of 
khuskhus  grass  fixed  in  the  open  doorways. 
About  the  beginning  of  May  the  hot  winds  com- 
mence blowing,  and  keep  on  more  or  less  till 
the  rains  set  in,  which  they  do  about  the  middle 
of  June.  When  water  is  dashed  over  the  screens 
so  as  to  wet  them  thoroughly,  the  hot  wind 
blows  through  them  into  the  house  quite  cool, 
and  sitting  near  a  tatty  is  pleasant  enough. 

Another  means  of  cooling  the  house  is  by 
machines  called  thermantidotes.  A  thermantidote 
is  a  large  sort  of  box  with  a  revolving  fan  inside, 
which  is  turned  by  coolies.  On  both  sides  of 
the  box  are  apertures  in  which  are  fitted  small 
khuskhus  tatties.  The  machine  has  a  mouth 
fitting  into  a  door  of  the  house  constructed  for 


 99 

the  purpose.  When  the  fan  is  turned  on  it 
drives  the  air  through  the  mouth  into  the  house, 
and  as  this  becomes  exhausted  in  the  machine  a 
fresh  supply  is  drawn  in  through  the  tatties, 
which,  being  wetted,  cool  it.  A  good  therman- 
tidote  will  make  a  difference  of  4°  or  5°  in 
the  temperature  of  a  room,  and  what  that  means 
only  those  who  have  lived  in  tropical  climates 
can  realise. 

I  laid  great  stress  on  the  necessity  of  having 
a  good  house,  and  it  is  of  no  less  importance  to 
have  the  best  food  you  can  buy.  Naturally  in 
the  hot  weather  there  is  not  much  inclination  to 
eat,  but  whatever  food  you  take  should  be  the 
best  you  can  get  for  money.  About  bread  there 
is  no  difficulty ;  that  can  always  be  got  good  in 
every  station,  but  meat  is  a  very  different  matter. 
It  is  impossible  to  get  good  mutton  in  the  bazaars, 
and  the  only  plan  is  to  belong  to  what  is  called  a 
"mutton  club"  ;  that  is  to  say,  a  certain  num- 
ber of  people  join  together  and  keep  a  lot  of 


100  

sheep,  which  are  fed  on  a  grain  called  gram,  and 
so  many  sheep  are  killed  per  week  and  divided 
according  to  the  number  of  members  in  the  club. 
A  sheep  should  not  be  killed  until  it  has  been 
fed  up  for  six  months,  but  after  that,  if  it  is  of 
the  right  kind  and  the  proper  age,  it  will  be 
found  to  be  very  excellent  mutton.  Beef  can  be 
got  pretty  good  in  the  bazaars,  but  even  for  that 
it  is  far  better,  if  possible,  to  belong  to  what  is 
called  a  "  gynee  club."  Gynees  are  a  small  breed 
of  cattle,  and  after  being  well  fed  turn  into  first- 
rate  beef.  Fowls  and  ducks  are  much  cheaper 
than  they  are  in  England.  Pig  meat,  such  as 
pork  and  bacon,  can  hardly  be  obtained  in  India, 
and  the  bacon  always  used  is  that  which  comes 
out  in  tins  from  England. 

One  cannot  avoid  having  a  great  many  tinned 
things,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  making  up  a 
really  good  dinner  without  them.  For  instance, 
at  dinner-parties  the  fish  would  be  tinned,  the 
bacon,  the  pate  de  foie  gras,  asparagus,  and 


 101 

cheese,  if  all  these  things  were  used,  and  maybe 
others  as  well.  A  story  is  told  of  a  lady  who 
was  born  in  India  and  had  never  been  out  of  the 
country.  She  heard  that  a  distinguished  officer 
who  had  been  home  on  leave  had,  while  there, 
dined  at  Windsor  Castle ;  so  the  first  time  she 
met  him,  she  said,  "  I  hear  you  dined  with  the 
Queen?"  "  Yes,"  he  replied.  "Ah!  nothing 
but  tinned  provisions,  I  suppose  ?  "  said  the  lady, 
as  this  was  her  only  idea  of  what  a  first-rate 
dinner  could  be ! 

Then  ice  is  a  matter  of  great  importance 
in  the  hot  weather;  in  fact,  it  makes  all  the 
difference  between  living  a  moderately  comfort- 
able life  and  simply  existing.  India  is  much 
better  off  in  this  respect  than  it  used  to  be,  as 
there  are  large  establishments  for  the  manu- 
facture of  ice  by  machinery  in  most  parts  of  the 
country,  and  a  station  can  hardly  be  so  small 
or  out  of  the  way  that  people  living  in  it  cannot 
arrange  to  get  machine-made  ice  from  some- 
where. In  the  upper  parts  of  India  there  are, 


102  

as  a  rule,  several  nights  of  frost  in  the  course  of 
the  winter,  and  the  plan  (which  is  still  adopted 
in  some  places)  always  used  to  be  to  put  out  an 
immense  number  of  shallow  earthen  saucers,  in 
which  a  little  water  was  placed.  These  saucers 
are  examined  in  the  early  morning,  long  before 
daylight,  and  if  there  has  been  a  slight  frost  a 
very  thin  coating  of  ice  is  found  on  them.  This 
is  all  carefully  collected  at  once  and  carried  away 
to  the  ice -pits,  where  it  is  tightly  rammed  down 
and  kept  for  summer  use.  This  is  the  cheapest 
ice,  but  it  can  only  be  used  to  put  round  bottles, 
while  the  machine  ice,  which  is  made  in  large 
slabs,  can  be  broken  up  into  lumps  and  put  into 
wine  or  water.  In  the  hills  there  are  no  ice- 
machines,  and  the  plan  there  is  to  collect  the 
snow  which  usually  falls  in  the  winter,  ram  it 
down  tightly  in  pits,  and  then  use  it  in  the 
summer  to  put  round  bottles. 

One  thing,  which  is  of  great  importance  to 
those  who  wish  to  keep  their  health  during  the 


 103 

hot  weather,  is  to  be  moderate  about  eating, 
drinking,  and  smoking.  As  I  have  said,  the 
inclination  to  eat  is  usually  not  great,  but  drink- 
ing is  quite  another  matter,  and  I  think  the 
experience  of  most  people  shows  that  for  those 
who  are  not  teetotallers  the  very  light  wines 
mixed  with  soda-water  form  about  the  best  and 
safest  beverages. 

There  are  few  things  more  refreshing  or 
wholesome  in  the  hot  weather  than  lime-juice 
and  soda-water.  The  limes  are  ripe  a  short  time 
before  the  summer  sets  in,  and  it  is  very  easy  to 
get  any  number  of  them  and  save  the  juice, 
mixed  with  sugar,  in  bottles. 

The  summer  in  India,  or  the  hot  weather,  as 
it  is  called  in  contradistinction  to  the  cold 
weather,  which  is  the  term  used  for  winter,  has 
several  phases.  It  sets  in  about  the  beginning 
of  April  in  Upper  India,  and  increases  in  severity 
till  the  middle  of  June,  or  whenever  the  rains 
commence,  as  this  season  varies  in  different  parts 
of  the  country.  As  long  as  the  dry  heat  lasts  it 


104  LIFE    IN   INDIA. 

is  essential  to  keep  the  house  closed,  except  for 
a  short  time  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  when 
it  is  opened  for  the  sake  of  ventilation.  It  is 
during  these  two  months  of  dry  heat  that  therm  - 
antidotes  are  so  useful,  and  the  hot  winds, 
which  are  like  the  sirocco,  blow  during  the  day- 
time, and,  blowing  through  the  wetted  khuskhus 
tatties,  cool  the  houses. 

The  only  variations  are  occasional  dust-storms, 
so  called  because  of  the  violent  gales  of  wind 
which  raise  vast  clouds  of  dust,  and  darken  the 
atmosphere  almost  as  much  as  a  London  fog 
does.  These  storms  cool  the  air  somewhat  for  a 
short  time,  but  the  first  real  relief  is  experienced 
when  the  monsoon  or  rainy  season  sets  in. 
Directly  this  takes  place  houses  are  thrown  open 
at  once  for  the  sake  of  thorough  ventilation,  as 
tatties  and  thermantidotes  are  only  of  use  in  dry 
heat,  and  from  the  setting  in  of  the  monsoon  till 
the  end  of  the  summer  the  heat  is  damp.  The 
thermometer  falls  now  considerably,  but  it  is  not 
wonderful  that  the  weather,  though  less  oppres- 


 105 

sive,  is  not  nearly  so  healthy  as  it  is  during  the 
dry  heat.  This  is  the  great  time  of  the  year  for 
fever,  and  it  is  almost  always  at  this  season  that 
cholera  claims  its  victims. 

One  can  put  up  with  a  great  deal  if  only  a 
good  night's  rest  can  be  secured,  and  during  the 
dry  heat  I  always  found  that  the  best  plan  was 
to  have  my  bed  put  outside,  and  sleep  out  of 
doors.  This  can  be  done  without  a  punkah  long 
after  it  would  be  possible  to  do  without  one  in 
the  house,  and  when  the  heat  increases  so  much 
as  to  render  a  punkah  necessary  even  out  of 
doors  there  is  not  much  difficulty  in  fitting  one 
up  on  a  framework,  but  as  soon  as  the  rains  set 
in  sleeping  out  of  doors  is  out  of  the  question ; 
for,  even  if  it  were  not  raining,  the  damp  rising 
from  the  ground  would  be  certain  to  produce 
fever.  It  is,  of  course,  not  astonishing  that  this 
is  the  time  for  the  growth  of  vegetation.  Between 
copious  rainfall  and  hot-house  heat,  it  would  be 
wonderful  were  it  otherwise ;  but  it  is  not  the 
time  either  for  the  flower  or  vegetable  garden, 


106  

as  they  only  thrive  during  the  cold  weather. 
What  I  mean  is  that  grass  springs  up  rapidly, 
and  attains  a  considerable  height,  while  creepers, 
&c.  abound  everywhere ;  and  it  is  at  this  season 
that  the  jungles  acquire  that  denseness  which  is 
only  mown  down  by  fire  after  several  months  of 
nearly  uninterrupted  dry  weather. 

During  the  two  months  of  dry  heat,  those  who 
are  tied  to  the  plains  have  to  keep  themselves 
shut  up  in  their  houses  during  the  day.  The 
early  morning  is  the  time  to  go  out  for  a  ride 
or  drive,  returning  home  by  nine  or  half-past 
nine,  and  remaining  under  the  punkah  till  about 
five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  people  go  out 
to  racquets  or  lawn  tennis,  or  whatever  they  may 
want  to  do. 

During  the  rains  they  have  more  liberty,  as  it 
is  frequently  possible  to  be  about  out  of  doors 
all  day  long,  but  there  is  a  greater  feeling  of 
languor,  and  I  think  most  people  would  say  that 
they  enjoy  better  health  and  feel  more  fit  either 
for  work  or  amusement  in  the  extreme  but  dry 


 107 

heat  than  they  do  when  the  rains  have  set  in. 
The  monsoon  conies  to  an  end  about  the  middle 
of  September,  or  earlier,  according  to  the  part 
of  India  in  which  you  live,  and  then  people  who 
have  been  spending  the  summer  in  the  plains 
begin  to  look  forward  to  the  return  of  their 
friends  who  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  get 
to  the  hills,  and  to  what  is  really  the  enjoyable 
time  in  the  plains,  viz.  the  cold  weather.  Of 
this  I  have  spoken  before,  so  I  may  consider 
that  I  have  now  given  a  slight  idea  of  how  the 
whole  year  passes  in  the  plains,  and  will  proceed 
to  say  a  few  words  about  life  in  the  Indian  hill- 
stations. 

As  regards  Upper  India,  the  principal  of  these, 
commencing  northwards,  are  Murree,  Dalhousie, 
Kasauli,  Simla,  Mussoorie,  Naini  Tal,  and  Dar- 
jeeling.  There  are  others  which  are  chiefly 
occupied  by  infantry  regiments,  but  I  need  only 
speak  of  the  larger  ones,  as  my  object  is  to  show 
how  society  lives  in  our  great  eastern  possession. 
They  commence  to  fill  about  the  beginning  of  April, 


108  

and  from  that  time  till  the  middle  of  October, 
most  houses  in  the  various  hill-stations  are 
occupied.  The  localities  are  as  a  rule  extremely 
pretty,  with  beautiful  scenery  and  surroundings. 
The  houses  are  built  in  all  sorts  of  queer  places  ; 
some  on  ridges,  others  on  foundations  cut  out 
of  the  side  of  seme  hill,  and  I  must  confess 
that  many  of  them  look  extremely  insecure. 
However,  they  have  stood  for  years,  and  unless 
overcome  by  some  calamity  like  the  great  land- 
slip which  occurred  in  Naini  Tal  in  1880,  will, 
no  doubt,  stand  for  many  more. 

In  Ootacamund,  which  is  the  hill-station  for 
Madras,  and  a  very  beautiful  one,  too,  I  believe, 
people  drive  freely  all  over  the  place,  but  in  most 
of  those  which  I  have  mentioned  in  Upper  India 
driving  is  impossible.  Two  or  three  people, 
such  as  the  Viceroy  and  Commander-in-Chief, 
are  allowed  to  have  pony  carriages  in  Simla; 
but  as  a  rule,  the  means  of  locomotion  in  the 
hills  is  either  by  riding  for  men,  or  by  jampans 
and  dandies  for  ladies. 


 109 

These  are  two  sorts  of  chairs  carried  by 
coolies,  who  are  called  while  hired  for  this 
purpose  jampannies.  The  former  requires  four 
men  at  a  time  to  carry  it,  and  the  latter  two. 
These  conveyances  have  coverings  or  hoods,  so 
that  ladies  can  go  about  in  them  quite  well  at 
night  or  in  wet  weather,  and  the  jampannies  are 
so  expert  at  carrying  them,  that  there  is  hardly 
any  ground  so  rough  or  bad  that  they  will  not 
get  safely  over  it. 

The  climate  in  the  hills  is,  as  a  rule,  all  that 
can  be  desired.  The  first  two  months  of  the 
summer  season  are  perfectly  bright  and  fine 
every  day,  and  now  and  then  the  heat  is  a  little 
oppressive,  perhaps,  but  never  anything  to  speak 
of,  and  the  nights  are  always  cool.  This  is  the 
great  time  for  picnics,  and,  indeed,  gaiety  of  all 
sorts ;  for  people  think,  I  suppose,  that  it  is  best 
to  get  what  amusement  they  can  before  the  rains 
set  in.  When  these  come  on,  life  in  the  hills  is 
not  so  pleasant,  for  it  rains  almost  every  day, 
and  the  stations  are  constantly  enveloped  in 


110  

clouds,  everything  is  reeking  with  wet  and 
damp,  and  it  is  no  joke  having  to  ride  five  or 
six  miles  on  a  pony  through  a  pouring  rain  to 
dine  out,  as  may  easily  happen  to  you  in  Simla. 
It  rains,  too,  in  India  in  a  manner  of  which 
people  who  live  in  England  have  but  little  idea. 
I  have  seen  fifteen  inches  fall  in  the  twenty-four 
hours,  and  when  the  landslip  at  Naini  Tal  took 
place,  there  were  forty-two  inches  of  rain  in 
thirty-six  hours,  or  more  than  the  rainfall  of  the 
whole  year  in  England. 

About  the  middle  of  September  or  so,  fine 
weather  sets  in,  and  from  then  till  December  is, 
to  my  mind,  the  most  perfect  time  in  the  hills 
all  the  year  round.  The  trees  on  every  side  are 
covered  with  ferns  and  creepers,  the  product  of 
three  months'  rain,  and  these  with  the  autumn 
tints  on  them  form  a  lovely  picture.  The  air  is 
bright  and  clear  with  the  crispness  of  approach- 
ing winter  in  it,  and  now  is  the  time  for  those 
who  care  about  splendid  views.  I  know  of  no 
finer  panorama  than  that  which  can  be  seen 


 Ill 

from   the  top  of  Cheena,  the  highest  point   ia 
Nairn  Tal,   on  almost  any   morning  soon   after 
the  cessation  of  the  rains.     Looking   over   one 
shoulder,  you  see  the  Himalayas  stretching  away 
before  you  for  miles  and  miles  to  the  east  and 
west  in  an   unbroken  snow-clad  line,    with   the 
lower  hills   and  green  valleys  between   yourself 
and  them.     Though  really  many  miles  distant, 
they  seem,  owing  to  the  clearness  of  the  atmo- 
sphere, quite  close,  and  the  more  so  as  it  is  easy, 
if  there  is  any  wind  blowing,  to  see  the  snow 
being  carried  away  off  the  peaks  in  little  white 
clouds.       You   turn    and    look   over   the   other 
shoulder,  and  there,  lying  below  you,  stretch  out 
the  plains  to  Bareilly  and  Moradabad,  a  distance 
of  seventy    miles,    with   forest   patches   of   the 
Terai  dotted  about,  and  different  streams  shining 
in  their  course  from  the  hills  through  the  plains. 
The  distance  you  can  see  is  really  only  limited 
by  the  power  of  your  vision,  and,  as  I  have  said, 
I  have  never  seen   anything  more  beautiful  or 
wonderful  than  the  scene  which  may  be  surveyed 


112  

from  Cheena.  No  less  beautiful  is  it  to  go  up 
there  about  sunset  and  watch  the  rays  of  the 
setting  sun  casting  many-coloured  tints  on  the 
snow-clad  peaks,  and  shining  on  the  rivers  as  it 
descends  to  the  horizon. 

For  scenery,  I  doubt  if  there  are  many  coun- 
tries which  can  beat  the  Himalayas  ;  and  as  far 
as  climate  is  concerned,  if  a  man  is  fortunate 
enough  to  be  one  of  those  officials  who  spend 
their  cold  weather  in  the  plains  and  their  hot 
weather  in  the  hills,  he  has  very  little  to  com- 
plain of. 

If  children  are  sent  or  taken  to  the 
hills  every  hot  weather,  they  may  very  well 
remain  in  India  either  till  it  is  time  for  the  boys 
to  go  to  school,  or  until  the  girls  are  eleven  or 
twelve  years  old,  but  they  should  not  be  kept  in 
the  plains  during  the  hot  weather  after  five  or 
six  years  of  age. 

Altogether  there  can  be  no  question  that  India 
is  a  very  wonderful  country,  and  decidedly  the 


LIFE    IN   INDIA.  113 

place  for  a  poor  man.  For  instance,  no  military 
officer  can  serve  in  England  who  has  not  private 
means ;  but  if  a  man  can  manage  to  get  on  till 
he  has  passed  from  the  English  into  the  Indian 
service,  he  will  find  that  he  can  live  quite  well 
on  his  pay.  If  he  is  a  hard-working  man,  his 
chances  of  remunerative  employment  are  always 
good,  and  he  is  far  more  likely  to  see  active 
service  in  India  than  in  any  other  part  of  Her 
Majesty's  dominions. 

The  Indian  Civil  Service  is  a  fine  profession 
for  those  who  can  get  into  it ;  but  in  these  days 
of  competition  to  succeed  in  doing  so  requires 
such  an  amount  of  cramming,  that  a  boy  when 
he  has  distanced  others  is  pretty  well  worked 
out,  and  the  first  thing  he  needs  is  complete  rest 
for  some  time. 

And  now  I  have  done.  My  object  has  been  to 
give  a  brief  account  of  life  in  India,  and  I  trust 
that  what  I  have  written  may  be  of  service  to 
some  of  those  who  go  out  there,  either  profes- 

8 


114  

sionally  or  merely  as  travellers  to  see  the 
country ;  and  not  without  interest  to  those  who 
know  nothing  of  India  and  are  not  likely  to 
visit  it. 


LONDON 
H.  ALLEN  AND  Co.,  13,  WATERLOO  PLACB,  S.W, 


A    000  059  075     2 